======================================================================
Meta Analysis 00 Introducting myself
======================================================================

Dear students, welcome in this course on ma analysis.

I'm inviata.

I am a professor of statistics and methodology at the faculty of psychology and educational sciences of the Kuven.

Long time ago, I did a PhD study on the use of multi-level models also called mix models for doing meta analysis.

Nowadays, I have two research lines.

First, I'm doing methodological research on meta analytic techniques and models and I'm involved in applied meta analysis.

Second, I'm doing research on learning analytics, which is the collection of data when students use technology as well as the analysis of these data in order to optimize and personalize the learning environment.

I also teach statistical courses, especially introductory courses at the faculty of psychology and educational sciences at K Louven, mainly at the compass in Cort, which is about 100 kilometers west of Luven.

I hope you will enjoy this course and you will learn a lot.

Good luck.

======================================================================
Meta Analysis 01 Introduction What is meta analysis？
======================================================================

In this screencast, I will introduce the principles of meta analysis.

To do so, I will start from a simulation to explain the problem of failures to replicate and to show how meta analysis can help us out.

Next, we will look at more complex scenarios than the one from the simulation.

And finally, I will give an overview of questions that are often studied in met analysis and of the steps that are typically involved.

First, the problem of failures to replicate.

Suppose there is an association between gender and the scores on the mathematics exam in the sense that female students perform better than male students.

Suppose that both uh for female and male students the scores follow a normal distribution with a common standard deviation but that female students perform on average half a point better than male students.

A measure that we can use to express a size of the association between gender and met is the difference between the means which here is 050.

A drawback of this measure, however, is that its size depends on the way the variable is measured.

Suppose that the exam is not measured.

It's not an exam with scores on a scale from 0 to 10, but rather with scores on a scale from 0 to 100.

Then maybe on average, female students will perform 85 and male students 80.

Therefore, the difference would be five points instead of half a point.

In other words, talking about the difference between the means to express a size of the association only makes sense if you know on what scale the variable is measured.

To solve that problem, very often a standardized mean difference is calculated.

The difference between the means is standardized by dividing this difference by the standard deviation.

In this example, the standardized mean difference is a difference of 050 divided by the standard deviation of 1.5.

Therefore, the standardized mean difference is equal to 0.33.

This measure was already introduced in 1969 by con.

Note that we are talking here about the population of female and me and male students.

That's also why I use Greek symbols to refer to the means and to the standard deviation and why I use the Greek symbol delta to refer to the standardized mean difference.

Now suppose that in a study samples are drawn from these populations based on the scores you observe in these samples.

You can also calculate a standardized mean difference.

More specifically, you can calculate a difference in sample means and standardize this difference by dividing it by a kind of pulled or averaged standard deviation which I will explain later in this course.

We will call the statistic calculated based on the sample data an observed standardized mean difference or an observed effect size.

And this observed standardized mean difference can be used to estimate the population standardized mean difference also called the true standardized mean difference.

In other words, G is used as an estimate of delta.

Note that thanks to the standardizing it becomes possible to say something about whether a specific value can be considered as high or small because this does not depend on the scale anymore.

Cohen gave us guidelines for interpreting standardized mean differences in the behavioral sciences by calculating standardized mean differences for a large number of studies and looking at the interpretation the authors of these studies gave to the effects they found based on the guidelines of con a standardized mean difference of 0.20 20 is considered a small effect.

A standardized mean difference of 050 a moderate effect and 0.80 is considered a large effect.

Now back to the example we have seen that in the that the population standardized mean difference is 0.33.

Of course in reality we often do not know the population means and standard deviation.

What we have instead in a typical study is a sample of scores from both populations.

Still, we can use these two samples to say something about the standardized mean difference from the population.

I simulated this process by asking the computer to give me a sample of 20 scores from a normal distribution with mean 8 and standard deviation 1.5 and to give me also a random sample of 20 scores from the female population with a normal distribution with mean 8.5 and standard deviation 1.5.

Here you see the results for the fe for the male students.

The average score is somewhat higher than the population mean.

We obtained the sample mean of 8.10 whereas the population mean was equal to 8.

That on average the scores were a little bit higher than the mean of the population is due to coincidence.

In a sample of 20 scores for female students, I obtained an average score of 9.34.

This is much higher than the mean of the female population 8.5.

In the two samples, the standard deviations were exactly equal to each other 1.55.

It is again due to coincidence that these standard deviations were slightly larger than the population standard deviation of 1.5 and that they are exactly the same in both samples.

Now suppose that the values I have drawn were the values observed in a real study.

In that case probably the researchers would perform a t test to test whether on average there is a difference between male and female students.

Based on the simulated data we get a relatively small p value a p value of 0.015.

If we would use a significance level of 5% then we would reject the null hypothesis.

The null hypothesis saying that the two population means are equal.

In other words, we would conclude that there is a difference between male and female students in the sense that female students perform better than male students.

In this example, this is indeed the correct conclusion.

Female students indeed perform better than male students.

I also calculated the observed standardized mean difference.

This gives a value of 0.80.

In other words, if these were the data of a real study, in this study, the standardized mean difference of the population would have been overestimated.

In reality, the population standardized mean difference is equal to 0.33.

Whereas based on our sample data, our estimate is 0.80.

In some if these were the data of real study, we would overestimate the difference between male and female students, but we would come to the correct conclusion that female students perform better than male students.

I've done this simulation a second time.

In a new sample of 20 male students, the mean is 7.60, 60 which is somewhat too smaller than population mean of eight.

The sample mean for the female students now is 7.59 which is much too small and it is even slightly smaller than the sample mean for the male students.

Now the two standard deviations are different and are slightly smaller than the population standard deviation.

You can see that the two sample means are very similar.

Using a t test to test the difference between the population means therefore results in a large p value.

The p value is equal to 98.

Based on these data, the conclusion would be that there is no difference between male and female students, which is an incorrect conclusion.

If we then estimate the size of the effect, we get a standardized mean difference very close to zero because the two sample means are very close to each other.

You can also see that the standardized mean difference now is negative because now our sample of female students perform on average slightly worse than our sample of male students.

In some if this were the data of real study, the conclusion of the researchers would be wrong.

They would conclude that there is no difference between male and female students.

Moreover, the estimate of the standardized mean difference would be completely wrong. our estimate is almost equal to zero and even slightly negative whereas in reality there is a positive effect in the sense that female students perform better.

I've done this simulation another eight times.

Therefore in total I simulated 10 data sets.

Now look at the p values.

You can see that very often the p value is not very small.

Often the p value is larger than 0.05. of five.

This means that often the null hypothesis that there is no difference between male and female students.

So the null hypothesis that there is no association between gender and mathematics is not rejected.

Therefore often an incorrect conclusion is drawn.

Only in two out of the 10 times the correct conclusion was drawn that female students perform better than male students.

Now look at the standardized mean differences.

Remember that in reality the population standardized mean difference is equal to 0.33.

But now we see that our estimates sometimes sometimes are much larger like in the first simulated data set.

But sometimes our estimates are much smaller like in the second simulated data set.

Sometimes the standardized mean difference is negative.

Sometimes it's positive.

In general, you can see that these observed standardized mean differences are varying around the population standardized mean difference.

And indeed, it can be shown mathematically that the observed standardized mean difference is normally distributed around the population standardized mean difference.

In other words, if you would draw a very large or an infinite number of samples and each time calculate the observed standardized mean difference, at the end you would observe a normal distribution of values around the true population effect size.

This distribution is called the sampling distribution of the standardized mean difference.

It can also be shown that the variance of this sampling distribution called the sampling variance is more or less equal to four divided by the total size of the study.

Remember that in our example we simulated samples of size 20.

Therefore in total the study sample size was equal to 40.

Therefore the sampling variance of G is equal to 4 / 40.

This is equal to 0.10. 10.

If we know that G follows a normal distribution with mean delta and a variance that we can calculate, we can use this to construct confidence intervals.

For instance, to calculate a 95% confidence interval, we can subtract and add 1.96* the square root of 0.10 to G.

We can now say with 95 com 95% confidence that the population effect size studied in this study is situated within this interval.

I have constructed confidence intervals for each of the 10 observed effect sizes from the 10 simulated data sets.

Remember that population effect size was equal to 0.33.

You can see in this plot that sometimes the simulated effect size was somewhat too high and sometimes it was somewhat too low.

But the observed effect sizes clearly vary around the population effect size of 0.33.

Only in the fourth simulated data set, the observed effect size was very close to the population effect size.

Further note that zero is included in almost all of these confidence intervals for eight out of the 10 simulated data sets.

Zero is included in the confidence interval, which means that the null hypothesis that the population effect size is equal to zero is not rejected.

Only in two data sets in the first and in the sixth data set zero is not included in the confidence interval.

Only in these two cases the significance test reveals that the population effect sizes are different from zero.

But as you can see exactly in these two studies the size of the effects is highly overestimated.

Now suppose that these 10 simulated data sets came from 10 real studies.

You can see the issue of failures to replicate.

By coincidence, studies can come to very different estimates and even different conclusions.

So what can we conclude about the population effect size?

Well, we have seen that the observed effect sizes vary around the population effect size.

So sometimes of observed effect sizes will be too large, sometimes they will be too small.

Therefore, if you want to say something about the population effect size, we can calculate an average of all these observed effect sizes to get a more precise estimate of the population effect size.

In other words, we sum all the effect sizes and divide this sum by the number of studies, which in metanalytic literature is very often referred to with a symbol K.

We can now use this mean as an estimate of the population effect size.

In our example, the mean effect size is equal to 0.25, which is not too far from the real um value of 0.33.

If you would have the data from 10 other studies, probably we would get a different mean effect size.

Again, it can be shown that the mean effect size fluctuates around the population effect size.

So sometimes our mean will be smaller, sometimes it will be larger than the population effect size.

This sampling distribution is again a normal distribution around the population effect size.

But importantly, the sampling variance now is k times smaller.

The sampling variance now is not sigma squared anymore, but it's sigma squar divided by k.

In our example, we had 10 effect sizes.

And for each of the effect sizes, the sampling variance was equal to 0.10.

The sampling variance of the mean effect size now is not 0.10 anymore.

It's 0.010.

In some if we use a mean effect size rather than an individual effect size, our estimate becomes more precise.

In other words, the estimate is more likely to be close to the population value.

I calculated confidence interval for the mean of the 10 simulated effect sizes given in red in the graph.

You can observe several things.

First, you can see that the individual observed effect sizes vary a lot around the population effect size, but the mean is relatively close to the population effect size.

A second observation is that the confidence interval now is smaller than for the individual studies.

For the individual studies, we had large confidence intervals which also had resulted in the fact that only in two out of the 10 studies we simulated a zero was not included in the confidence interval.

Therefore, only in two out of the 10 studies, the conclusion was correct.

More specifically, that female students perform better than male students.

This illustrates that in the individual studies, the statistical power is relatively small.

But if you combine the results of several studies, you can see that the confidence interval becomes much smaller and now zero is not included in the confidence interval anymore.

So based on the combination of the data from the 10 data sets, we conclude that there is a difference between male and female students.

So that female students perform better than male students.

Based on the combination of the data, we draw the correct conclusion. there is an association between gender and met.

This illustrates that the statistical power or the probability that we will reject a null hypothesis increases by combining the data of several studies.

To summarize, observed effect sizes in individual studies may vary a lot, whereas the combined effect size is often close to the population effect size. we are indeed averaging out the noise.

Negative and positive deviations are canceled out.

A second observation is that for the individual studies, confidence intervals were relatively uh large.

Whereas for our combined confidence interval, the confidence interval was relatively small, illustrating that the accuracy or the precision is higher. we can better estimate what the population effect size is.

Third, zero was often included in the confidence intervals for the individual studies.

Whereas, if we combine the results, zero was not included in the confidence interval, illustrating that by combining the results of several studies, we can increase the statistical power.

If you want to try out out this simulation yourself, you can make use of the Excel file simulation MA which you can find on to.

This file contains several sheets.

The first sheet called raw data includes a data of 10 studies.

Data that are randomly drawn from normal distributions.

For each study, random samples of 20 scores are drawn from two normal distributions.

If you click on the function key F9, all these values are replaced by new randomly drawn values from these normal distributions.

The second sheet called study one, you can see the means, standard deviations, sample sizes, the observed standardized mean difference, the t and the p value for the first study.

The values are calculated based on the data from the first study from the previous sheet.

Again, if you click on F9, new random data will be sampled and these values will change.

In the third sheet called K studies, you get an overview of all the means, standard deviations, sample sizes, standardized mean differences, TMP values for all 10 studies.

And in the final sheet called meta analysis, you can see the calculation of the mean effect size.

You can also see a plot with a confidence interval for the individual studies as well as for the mean effect size.

I suggest you to click a few times on F9.

Each time data for a new data for a new set of 10 studies will be simulated and all means, standard deviations and so on will be adapted.

In that way you will see that the observed effect sizes will indeed vary a lot around the population effect size.

But we'll also see that the mean of the observed effect sizes will in general be very close to the population effect size which illustrates the increase of precision.

You can also see that very often zero um will be included in the conference interval if we look at the individual studies, but it will often be not included in the conference interval when we look at the combined results which illustrates that combining effect sizes increases the statistical power.

In fact, what we have done here is a meta analysis.

Jean Glass introduced this term meta analysis to refer to the analysis of analysis or the analysis of the results of multiple studies.

But of course in reality meta analysis often are much more complex.

A first complexity is that very often studies have samples of different sizes.

We have seen that the sampling distribution of G is a normal distribution with a mean of delta with a sampling variance more or less equal to four divided by the size of the study.

This means that if you take small samples for instance samples of size 20 observed effect sizes fluctuate a lot and can deviate a lot from the population effect size.

But if instead we would take large samples, the sampling distribution would become much smaller.

If for instance we have two groups of size 100, the sampling variance becomes becomes 4 divided by 200.

This means that our sampling distribution is much smaller.

In other words, that the observed effect sizes are in general closer to the population effect size.

Now suppose that you have access to several observed effect sizes, some from small studies and some from large studies.

You know that all these effect sizes tell us something about the population effect size.

But as you can see on this slide, effect sizes from large studies probably are close to the population effect size.

Whereas for small studies, observed effect sizes can be far away from the population effect size.

Therefore, if you want to estimate the population effect size, we are going to look especially at the larger studies.

Therefore, instead of calculating an ordinary average, it is better to calculate a weighted average of the observed effect sizes.

As weights, we can use the size of the study or even better we can use the precision which is equal to one over the sampling variance.

If we have an observed effect size from a large study, the sampling variance of this effect size will be small.

Therefore, the precision of the effect size will be high and a large weight will be given to that study.

Note that if all studies would be of the same size, the precision would be the same for all these studies and the weighted average of the observed effect sizes would be exactly the same as the ordinary average effect size.

A second complication is the following.

In our simulation, we assumed that population effect sizes were exactly the same in all 10 studies.

Delta 1 is equal to delta 2 is equal to delta 3 and so on.

Of course, even if the population effect size is the same for all studies, there can be differences between observed effect sizes because in each study only a sample of scores is taken.

In other words, observed effect sizes can vary due to sampling variation and the amount of sampling variation depends on the size of the study.

Yet, it's also possible that the assumption that the population effect size is the same for all studies is not true.

If a similar research question has been studied multiple times, this is typically not done in exactly the same way.

There can be a lot of differences between studies.

For instance, it's possible that the kind of participants is not the same in all studies.

Maybe in some studies children are studied whereas in other studies adults are studied.

It's also possible that the context of the study is not exactly the same in all studies.

Also the outcome variables or the way in which they are measured can vary across studies.

Also the kind of and dose of treatment can differ between studies.

Another study characteristic that can vary between studies is a study design.

Maybe some studies may use an experimental designs whereas other studies may use a correlational design.

In some there can be a lot of differences between studies.

And importantly, these differences can make it unlikely that the population effect size that is studied is exactly the same in all studies.

So maybe there are also differences between the population effect sizes.

In this scenario, there are two sources of variation.

We have variation between the population effect sizes from studies.

So, variation between the deltas in metanalytic literature.

This variation in population effect sizes is often called the true variation or the systematic variation.

On top of that, we still have the sampling variation.

For instance, in study five, you can see that population effect size delta 5 is relatively small.

Yet, the observed effect size can be different.

It can by coincidence be even smaller than the population effect size or it can be larger than the population effect size from that study.

Finally, we will look at the questions and steps that can be distinguished in a typical meta analysis.

In a meta analysis, we typically try to answer multiple questions.

First question is, is there on average an effect?

Secondly, if overall there is an effect, how large is this effect?

So we want to test whether there is an effect and we want to estimate the size of the effect.

Another question that is very often answered in a meta analysis is can we consider population effect sizes to be the same in all studies.

If not, we talk about heterogeneity.

We do not only want to test whether there is heterogeneity, we also want to estimate the size of heterogeneity.

Next, if there is heterogeneity, a challenge is to try to explain this between study varants.

In what kind of studies is the effect larger than in what other kind of studies?

Another question that is sometimes but not often answered in a meta analysis is what is the effect in specific individual studies?

Based on the results of a meta analysis, we can indeed make improved estimates of the effect sizes for specific studies.

The coming sessions, we will look at how we can answer these different questions.

In a typical meta analysis, multiple steps are taken.

The first step is a formulation of research question.

Afterwards, a search is done for studies.

Often there will be a lot of hits, a lot of potentially relevant studies, but these may not all be relevant for our research interest or research question.

In the third step, therefore, we will select the relevant studies.

After selecting the relevant studies, we will extract the data that we need for doing our meta analysis.

Next, we convert the data to a common effect size measure.

In a statistical analysis, we combine and compare these effect sizes.

We also typically look for moderator variables.

These are study characteristics that are related to the size of the effect and therefore explain the heterogenity.

Finally, we report the results and draw conclusions.

These steps define the structure of this course.

======================================================================
Meta Analysis 02 Introduction Examples and alternative approaches
======================================================================

In the first part of the introduction, we looked at the principles of meta analysis.

Let's look now at some examples and alternatives.

First, we look at two examples.

First, an example in education.

Let's look at a meta analysis that was done already in 1984 by Stephenbush.

He did a study on teacher expectancy effects.

In several experiments, 19 experiments in total, teachers were told that part of the students of their class were weak students.

Another part of the students were called strong students without there being a real difference between these two groups of students.

After a while, the researchers looked at the grades that were given by the teachers to these students.

The researchers were interested in the question whether teachers would give higher grades to the so-called strong students.

If this is the case, this would be an indication of the expectancy that teachers had sorry this would be this would indicate that the expectancy that teachers had regarding their students influenced their scores.

This is called a teacher expectancy effect.

In all these experiments, we had two groups and based on the data, we can calculate a standardized mean difference which you can see in the column called G here.

A positive G refers to an effect in a direction that was expected in the sense that teachers are given giving higher grades to the so-called strong students.

A negative effect size, a negative G, would mean that the opposite difference is observed or specifically that teachers give higher grades to the so-called weak students, which is definitely not what you would expect.

Now, if you look at the cheese, then you can see that often these GS are positive, but sometimes they're negative.

Further, you can see that in general, these GS are relatively small.

Remember the guidelines of cone with 0.20 called a small effect, 050 a moderate effect, and 0.80 a large effect.

Very often, the effect sizes that were observed were even smaller than 0.20.

In the last column, you can see the standard error of these estimates.

In other words, the square root of the sampling variance.

We have seen that for the standardized mean difference this variance of the sampling distribution is about 4 divided by n.

There is another column called weeks of prior contact.

In some studies, there was no prior contact between teachers and students.

So teachers did not know the students yet at the start of the study.

In other studies, teachers already knew their students for one, two, or three weeks before the study took place.

The value three refers to three weeks or more than three weeks of prior contact.

Here the results of the meta analysis.

It was found that on average the observed effect size is equal to 0.084.

Remember the guidelines.

This effect can be called a very small effect and the corresponding p value is1.

Therefore the effect is statistically not significant.

Conclusion would be that in general there is no teacher expectancy effect.

Maybe in some studies the effect was positive and in other studies negative.

But on average the effect is close to zero and it is statistically not significantly different from zero.

But performing a met analysis with a regression model including the weeks of prior contact as a predictor gives interesting results.

The intercept can be interpreted as the expected effect when there was no prior contact.

So when the prior contact was equal to zero, the estimate of the intercept is equal to 0.41.

So if there was no prior contact, this is a moderate teacher expectancy effect.

Moreover, the p value is very small, which means that we can conclude that the effect is really there.

The estimated regression rate of the number of weeks is minus 0.16.

Which means that with each additional week of prior contact, the expected effect decreases with 0.6.

A decrease that is also statistically significant.

This makes sense.

It is indeed hard to make a teacher believe that one group is smarter than the other group when there is no difference between these two groups if the teacher already knows the students.

A second example, an example from medical research.

Kieran and Chen performed a meta analysis of some randomized controlled trials, RCTs, comparing long course and short course antibiotic therapy for urinary tract infections.

The measure that was used is the relative risk or the risk ratio which is the probability that the treatment does not work if a short course antibiotic therapy was given divided by the probability that the treatment fails if a long course antibiotic therapy was given.

Suppose that the short course therapy is equally effective as the long course therapy. then the probability that the treatment would fail is equal in both conditions and then the ratio of the two probabilities will be more or less equal to one.

So here no effect means that the relative risk is equal to one.

If the ratio is far from one then this is an indication that one of the two lengths is more effective.

An estimate of this relative risk in a study is the observed risk ratio which is the ratio of the proportions of patients in both conditions for which the treatment failed.

Here the results.

Let's look first at the observed effect sizes given with dots in the confidence intervals.

You can see that the observed effect sizes are typically larger than one.

But confidence intervals most often include one.

This means that in most of these studies, no convincing EV uh difference between the short course therapy and the long course therapy was was observed.

And therefore, it was concluded that the short course therapy is equally effective as the long course therapy. only in two out of the 12 studies a zero was not included in the confidence interval and therefore the null hypothesis was rejected.

Therefore, it looks like there is no difference between the two conditions.

But you get another conclusion if you combine all these observed effect sizes in a meta analysis.

The weighted average of all these effect sizes is 1.94, which means that the risk of failure is almost twice as large when using a short course therapy.

The 95% confidence interval from 1.19 to 3.15 does not include one anymore.

So whereas in most of the individual studies the conclusion was that we do not see a difference between the conditions combining the data gives us convincing evidence that the short course therapy is less effective than the long course therapy.

What we see here in this data set looks very similar to what we have seen in the simulation.

Individual studies are small making confidence intervals large and statistical power small.

But by combining the data the interval becomes much smaller and the power higher.

Here are the conclusions of the researchers.

They remark that very often in individual studies no statistically significant difference between the two treatments was found and therefore it was concluded that the short course therapy was equally effective.

But they also note that the fact there was no statistical significance can be due to the lack of statistical power.

By combining the results over all studies, we get a risk ratio of 1.94, which means that the probability that the treatment will fail is 94% larger if you would use short course therapy.

These were some examples of met analysis.

What are alternative procedures?

One procedure that is very often used is a so-called vote counting procedure.

The idea is very simple.

You collect the data of all studies that already were done on a specific research question.

You count how many studies found no effect, how many studies found a negative effect, and how many studies found a positive effect.

The category that is largest is the winner.

Therefore, if the majority of studies did not find an effect, then the conclusion would be that there is no effect.

The advantage of this procedure is that it is a relatively simple procedure.

Everybody can understand this procedure.

Yet, there are some drawbacks and these drawbacks are clear from what we have seen before.

Think of the last example we have seen, the example of the meta analysis of Kieran Chen.

It's possible that the power in individual studies is low and therefore we can expect that in a lot of individual studies we will not find an effect even if in reality there is an effect.

Therefore the power of the vote counting procedure can be very low.

Moreover, the power will not increase if you add more small studies to your data set.

On the contrary, it can become even more unlikely that the majority of studies will show a significant effect and therefore the power of the vote counting procedure can even decrease by adding additional studies.

Another drawback is that in this procedure all studies are given the same weight whereas we have seen that smaller studies will give less precise information on the population effect size and therefore it is better to give a larger weight to larger studies.

A final drawback is that based on the vote counting procedure we only give an answer to the question whether there is an effect in meta analysis.

On the other hand, we can answer much more questions.

We can also say something about how large the effect is.

We can test whether the effect size is the same in all studies.

And we can investigate whether the effect size depends on characteristics of the studies.

Another alternative procedure is the combination of p values.

For instance, look at the stufur method.

What is the idea?

Well, suppose that the null hypothesis is true in a specific primary study.

In that case, all one-sided p values between 0ero and one are equally likely.

For instance, the probability that we will find the p value smaller than 0.05 is exactly equal to 0.05 or the probability that our p value will be larger than 050 is 50.

Indeed, when the null hypothesis is true, the p values follow a norm a uniform distribution with limits zero and one.

We can normalize the p values by calculating the z value from a standard normal distribution that has a cumulative density corresponding to that p value.

For instance, suppose you find a p value of 0.025.

Then you look for the ZV value in a standard normal distribution for which a probability that you will find the value smaller than this value is. 025.

This ZV valueue is minus 1.96.

If the null hypothesis is true, the resulting ZV values follow a standard normal distribution.

Now suppose that we have multiple p values from multiple studies and that in all these individual studies the null hypothesis is true.

In that case all z values would follow a standard normal distribution.

The mean z value this is the sum divided by the number of studies k therefore will follow a normal distribution with zero mean and variance 1 over k.

Therefore, if we divide the sum of the Z values by the square root of K instead of by K, we get a standard normal distribution.

If however there is a study or few studies that show in effect in one direction, the one-sided P values from these studies will go in one direction and hence also the Z values will go in one direction and our test statistic will go away from zero.

We reject our null hypothesis if our test statistic is situated in the tail of the standard normal distribution.

Again, this procedure has some advantages and disadvantages.

One advantage is that we can use this approach whenever we have p values from multiple studies.

Indeed, we can combine P values even if the if these come from different statistical tests.

Therefore, the procedure can be used for instance if some of the P p values come from non-parametric tests, some come from analysis of variance and still others come from t tests for the difference between means and so on.

Another advantage is that we do not make assumptions.

Of course, maybe in an individual study, assumptions were made to obtain the p value from that study.

But when combining the p values, we do not make additional assumptions anymore about the distributions.

There are however also drawbacks.

One drawback is that the interpretation of the results is not straightforward.

The null hypothesis is that in all individual studies, the null hypothesis is true.

The alternative hypothesis is that at least in one of at least one of the null hypothesis is not correct.

If we reject the null hypothesis, we cannot conclude that on average there is an effect.

Instead, we have to conclude that in at least one of the studies there is an effect.

But the procedure will not tell us in what specific studies there is an effect.

Moreover, again we cannot answer other questions like how large is the effect?

Is the effect the same in all studies?

When does the effect show up?

And is the effect related to characteristics of the studies.

======================================================================
Meta Analysis 03 Study retrieval
======================================================================

In this video, we will look at the study retrieval.

In the introduction, we have seen that a meta analysis typically consists of eight steps.

In this video, we will look at the first three steps.

Formulating a research question, doing a systematic search for studies, and selecting the relevant studies.

Let's first look at the first step. the formulation of the research problem as well as in other studies.

It is important that you have a clear problem for formulation.

So before you start your study, so before you collect data, it is good that you know very well what exactly you want to study.

So this includes information on for instance a population.

So about what units you want to say something the variables.

So what characteristics you are interested in possible hypothesis or research questions.

So these are about the relations between these variables and then finally a further limitation of the problem.

So you you want to define what exactly you want to study um about these hypothesis or research questions.

To give an example, suppose in a study one is interested in the relationship between challenging behavior of persons with mental retardradation and the behavior of staff.

This research question may be too broad.

If you were to do a met analysis, then it is possible that you will find a lot of studies and also very yeah heterogeneous studies.

So it may be a better idea idea to limit the problem somewhat.

For instance, it's possible to limit the problem to uh the self-injury injurous behavior of persons with severe mental retardradition and stimulating behavior of staff.

So you limit the problem by looking at the specific behavior of um persons with retradation and specific behavior of the staff and you look at a subgroup of persons with mental retradation.

So this may make your systematic review or meta analysis more uh realistic more feasible to define the research question.

A helpful model is the PICO model.

In the PICO model, the P stands for the population, the I stands for the intervention or the interest, the C for the comparison, and the O for the outcome.

So, a good research question says something about these four elements.

To give an example, a good question could be what is the effect on drug abuse in secondary school students of giving information at school rather than giving sanctions to drug users.

So the population are students from secondary schools. intervention is giving information at school and you compare this intervention with another uh condition more specifically giving sanctions to drug users and to evaluate that intervention you look at the outcome drug abuse.

Next, you're going to search for studies.

And very often, we want to do a systematic search.

So, if you want to do a systematic review, then we need to do a systematic search as well.

And we talk about a systematic search.

If we are using a thorough and transparent search for all relevant studies, published and unpublished studies.

So we look at articles, books, conference papers, dissertations, research reports and so on.

So we look for all studies that potentially say something um about our research question.

To that end, we can look for literature in several steps.

I will discuss six possible steps.

The first step is the use of online uh databases.

So, it may be a good idea to ask somebody working in a library to help you with that. or you can find on the website of uh the university libraries uh some information about how you can search databases.

There are several databases to which uh we have access at the gloven the more the most important databases probably are ERIC psychonfo citation abstracts international web of science and so on.

We can also use Google or Google Scholar uh to look for interesting studies or other search engines like Alta Vista or Jahu.

But a problem with these um search engines is that you cannot replicate the search.

I mean if somebody else would uh try to repeat your search uh say in for instance one year or two years the person will probably not get exactly the same hits as you got uh when you do the search.

Now this is not true for the other databases.

So if you use for instance ERIC, if you search today in the ERIC database with a set of keywords and you do the same search again next year with the same keywords and you say I'm only interested in studies until for instance the end of 2021, you will get exactly the same results.

So you can replicate um the search if you use such a database which is not the case for Google, Google Scholar, Alta Vista, Jahu and so on.

So that's a reason for using um these scientific databases only.

The same is true for Limo or Limo.

This is the system that is used at K Louven that can be used to uh search databases or search immediately in all uh uh journals that are available at K Louven.

So also there what databases are in limo or what journals are in limo can vary from day to day and it is impossible or it yeah it is impossible to know next year what databases and what journals exactly were in limo today.

So also there it is impossible to replicate the search.

Moreover, of course, people from outside K Louven uh may not have access to limo.

So, which also makes that your search is not replicable.

So therefore I recommend to use these major databases and the major databases are for the field of medicine but for the field of behavioral sciences or psychology psycho and for the field of educational sciences ERIC it is also a good idea to combine multiple databases.

So for instance, if you're interested in specific therapy, behavioral therapy, well, you can find studies in Psych Info as well as studies in Pepmmet.

And there probably will be a lot of overlap between the studies that you find in the two databases, but it's possible that you also find uh relevant studies only in Psych Info or only in Pepmmet.

So therefore it is a good idea to combine multiple databases to find as many studies as possible.

If you go to limo at Kuran and you click on databases then you can type in for instance Eric and then one of the hits is um yeah the second one here educational resources information center ERIC.

So that's the database with the educational uh studies in it.

If you click on online access then yeah you can consult this database online.

To search these databases you try to translate your research question or research problem in keywords.

Again, the PICO model can be helpful to make sure that you are searching for studies on the population, intervention, and outcome variables of interest.

You can make use of quotes to keep words together.

For instance, if you're looking for studies on machine learning, you do not want to find all papers on machines and all papers on learning.

By using quotes, you can search for the concept machine learning.

Another trick is to use an asterisk to truncate a word by using meta analy with an asterisk.

For instance, you will look for studies that talk about meta analysis, metaanalytical, meta analysis, meta analyzing and so on.

Also, using boolean operators to link the keywords can help.

For instance, if a paper does not use the concept machine learning but talks about artificial intelligence or AI, this paper may also be relevant.

Therefore, you can search for studies that use the word machine learning or artificial intelligence or AI.

If a study uses at least one of these three terms, you will find the study.

You can use the and operator to look for studies that talk about something and about something else.

For instance, if you're looking for the use of AI in education, you could search for AI and education.

You can further restrict your research by using the not operator.

If you're interested in AI in primary education, you could say AI and education, not higher education.

Finally, the use of the near operator can avoid that you will get too many irrelevant hits when using and.

Using near four in between two terms for instance means that the two terms should be not more than four words apart from each other.

In that way you can for instance look for studies that talk about AI and education in the same sentence.

Finally in many databases you can indicate in what fields these words should be searched for.

Often we will get far too many hits if we look for these words in the whole paper.

Therefore, we typically look into the titles, keywords and abstracts.

In Web of Science, for instance, these fields are indicated by TI, AK, and AB.

But you can also search in all these three kinds of fields together by referring to D S which stands for topics.

There is of course always the risk that your research is missing relevant studies.

If you already know that there are some important papers that are definitely eligible, you can check whether you can find these papers with your search string.

If not, you may want to adapt your search. an example.

So in a study we have done about uh the staff reactions to challenging behavior in people with severe mental retardation.

We used the following keywords.

So you can see that we have three that we have defined three groups of keywords.

The first group of keywords was about yeah the the persons with mental retardation.

We said well disability or mental retardation or complex needs or high support needs or cognitive impairment or learning difficulty should be included in the paper.

Then we have a second group about the behavior of these persons.

So we said that challenging behavior or problem behavior or aggression or self-injury or self-insurance behavior should be included.

And then also a third uh one or more um terms from the third group should be included more specifically staff care care worker or special educator.

Note that um yeah you you see that we included problem behavior with a U.

It may also be a good idea to include problem behavior with an O only.

So without the U.

So in that way you have the UK and the US notation.

And in that way it's possible that you will find even more uh studies an example.

So in a study we have done about uh the staff reactions to challenging behavior in people with severe mental retardation we used the following keywords.

So you can see that we have three that we have defined three groups of keywords.

The first group of keywords was about yeah the the persons with mental retardation.

We said well disability or mental retardation or complex needs or high support needs or cognitive impairment or learning difficulty should be included in the paper.

Then we have a second group about the behavior of these persons.

So we said that challenging behavior or problem behavior or aggression or self-injuring or self-insurance behavior should be included.

And then also a third uh one or more um terms from the third group should be included more specifically staff care care worker or special educator.

Note that um yeah you you see that we included problem behavior with a U.

It may also be a good idea to include problem behavior with an O only.

So without the U.

So in that way you have the UK and the US notation.

And in that way it's possible that you will find even more uh studies.

Second example, in another study in which we studied uh students misconceptions of statistical inference, we again used uh three groups of keywords.

And so for each of the groups at least one of these terms should be included in the paper.

So we had misconception or error or misuse or misinterpretation or misunderstanding or fallacy.

And then the second group was inference or sampling or normal or confidence or interval or test or level or p value.

And then the last group was course or college or university.

So again here you can see that use of the pico model can help you to define uh keywords to find um other keywords that could be relevant.

It is possible to use the taros.

So for instance in Eric so here we are in Eric you can click there on search tools and then tool type you can click on this and then if you type in a word like misconceptions which is a relevant uh keyword for uh the study we were interested in.

So then Eric is given giving several suggestions or is uh giving some related words like cognitive structures, comprehension, concept formation, concept mapping, learning processes and so on.

So in this way we can look for what other keywords could be relevant for our search and you can then decide to include these keywords as well.

This is also in ERIC.

So here in ERIC I indicated that we are looking for keywords in the abstract or as a heading word or in the title and then you get a set of hits in the best case. uh probably you will get a lot of hits.

And you can see here in Eric um if you uh use limo to access access Eric you will find in the hits a link um K Louven that can be used to go to the full text.

So to to find the full text um electronically note that there is a trade-off between recall so we want to to find all relevant studies.

So we hope that the proportion of relevant literature that is found is as high as possible.

Ideally you will find all relevant literature.

So this can be done by uh using very broad keywords.

So the broader the keywords you use, the more studies you will find and the li the more likely it is that you will find all relevant information.

But the drawback is that in that way your search will not will be not be very precise.

It's possible that you will find a lot of hits that are not relevant.

So and if you get thousands of hits it can be a huge work to select the relevant studies afterwards.

So you have to find uh to try to find the balance between recall and precision.

So that's the first step uh the use of databases.

A second step can be browsing secondary sources.

What are secondary sources that can be for instance encyclopedias?

So if you are interested in for instance learning analytics well you can look in encyclopedias what uh is said about learning analytics.

So typically also think about Wikipedia for instance typically uh a lot of references are given uh that can be used to uh find uh important studies.

You can also go to special journals.

So there are some journals like psychological bulletin, educational research review that report um or that publish a lot of reviews or or a lot of meta analysis.

So maybe there were already meta analysis or systematic reviews about your research topic or there are reviews about uh yeah very related topics.

So it can be a good idea to look in these journals for relevant reviews so that in that way you already have an idea of what interesting studies could be also in other journals of course uh often reviews are published.

You can also look at handbooks at uh conference programs and proceedings and so on.

So secondary sources are sources that are not reporting directly on individual studies but they are referring to studies that can be looked uh for afterwards in a second step in third step.

So once you have found interesting studies you can look at the references.

So there are two ways you can uh uh yeah do a backward search which which means that you look in the reference list of these important uh studies.

So you look at what other studies does this study referred to and probably also um studies will be referred to that are relevant for your systematic review as well.

You can also do a forward research which means that you look at who or what other papers site this relevant study.

So to that end so look again at the hits we found um from a database here from Eric you can see there a link for a specific uh for each specific paper to find citing articles.

So you if you click on that link you will see what papers refer to this paper.

So we we call this a forward re uh search because the papers that link to this paper are newer papers.

A next step could be uh taking contact with researchers.

So if you found that there are some specific researchers that are apparently doing a lot of research that is relevant for your review, well you can contact these researchers to ask whether they have additional studies, studies that you did not yet find.

So you can talk to researchers at conferences or you can uh ask your professors um in the field whether they know of uh interesting studies that you did not found find yet.

Uh you can go to electronic discussion lists or you can uh yeah you can ask uh researchers um that are important in this field.

Important is that you look for heterogeneous contacts.

If you always um yeah go to the same type of researchers then there will be bias in the list of studies you find.

So if you know that there is a discussion in the domain between so if there are different schools within the domain that some groups of researchers uh use a specific type of of methods for instance and another group of researchers use another type of methods.

It's important that in the two schools or in the two groups of researchers you try to find um studies.

Next step could be browsing journals.

So again online you can use databases to see what journals were what articles or what papers are published in journals.

Of course here you are going to look at journals that um um that are within the scope of your systematic review.

So that that these are publishing a lot of papers in the field of interest for you.

And then the last step is looking for research registries.

It's more and more the case that uh for instance governmental organizations require when they give funding to to uh research groups or to projects they require that um the data are sent uh to these organizations or at least uh a report is sent to these organization independently of whether uh the results were statistically significant.

Um so for instance uh the food and drug administration of the US or the institute of education sciences of the US they ask or they keep a record of all studies that were funded uh by these organizations. um a note.

So we try to find all relevant studies but take into account or keep in mind that all relevant studies that were done are not necessarily representative for all studies that could have been done. very often it is the case that some specific subopuls or interventions or outcomes or designs are not yet sufficiently studied.

So it's important that you take this into account when you make interpretations or or draw conclusions.

But it can also be an important role of a meta analysis or a systematic review to give an overview of what has been studied yet and what does not have been studied what does not was not studied yet.

So based on your systematic review, you can uh suggest uh directions for future research.

In the previous step, we search for studies.

Often we will initially find a lot of potentially relevant studies.

In the next step, we make a selection of the studies that are really relevant.

It's not uncommon that initially there are two or three thousand potentially relevant studies, but that from these studies only about 100 studies appear to be really relevant and are to be included in the meta analysis.

For the selection of studies, we make a list of inclusion and exclusion criteria. for instance about yeah the population.

So do we look at all kinds of of persons or do we look do we look only at a specific age uh range?

You can also uh limit the type of treatment or the duration of the treatment.

You can also say that uh you will only look at uh studies using a specific design.

For instance, you can say that there should be a control group or at least a control condition.

You can also look at um or use the study quality as an inclusion criteria.

So you can say that only studies of a good quality will be included or of course you can say that yeah we need enough information about the outcome variable or about specific uh study characteristics before we can include that study in our systematic review.

So it is important to make uh an explicit list of inclusion and exclusion criterion criteria and it's also important to report on that list.

Why is it important?

Well, it's important because in that way you can uh make a selection of studies in a consistent way.

So it's important that if you selected a study for uh for your systematic review then another study that is very similar uh also has to be included in your systematic review and the other way around if you decide that a specific study should be excluded then a very similar study should also be excluded.

So that's consistency but also for replicability.

So this means that other researchers should be able to replicate or repeat your research and come to very similar conclusions.

So therefore it's important that you uh make clear what exact inclusion and exclusion criteria you used so that if another person would do the search and the study selection again that that person will get exactly the same uh uh results.

A remark is that if you use a very narrow criteria then you will probably have uh will end up with a small set of studies which is not good in a sense because the smaller the set of studies the lower the statistical power.

On the other hand if you use narrow criteria then your set of studies will be probably more homogeneous.

So we'll be more alike which is which makes that uh it is easier to draw conclusions or to interpret the results.

So a possible approach is that um you start with somewhat broader criteria in a pilot search and if you see that uh you will have too many hits.

So making it not feasible anymore uh to do this search uh to do this uh systematic review then you still can refine um the search.

So an example an example of in an exclusion criteria we used in a systematic review on the effects of priming.

Yeah.

For instance, one of the uh criteria was the relationship between the prime and a target should be of a direct semantic nature.

Not I will not give uh details about the meaning of this but you see that uh we said studies investigating other types of of priming such as phological priming morphological priming and so on were excluded.

We said the primes have to be presented subliminally which means that it is beneath the conscious threshold.

And then we defined further what we called the cons conscious threshold and so on and so further.

In this study, we found based on a search in databases 749 published articles.

And here we can see an overview of um what happened to these articles.

So what how many studies we excluded for various reasons.

So for instance 213 studies were excluded because the prime was not presented unconsciously and then it is uh further explained.

So for instance the prime duration was uh more than 100 milliseconds.

This was the case for 139 uh studies and so on.

So we give a a rather complete overview of the reasons why we decided to exclude studies and after excluding a lot of the studies only 46 uh articles remained in our data set.

So the final meta analysis included only 46 published articles.

So you see that we uh started from 749 studies and we ended up with only 46 published articles.

This is not uncommon.

Sometimes we even have much more hits.

We we start from say 1,000 or two or 3,000 papers and at the end we sometimes have even a smaller number of uh papers that are included in the meta analysis.

So it's clear that this process of study selection is a very timeconsuming process.

One of the selection criteria could also be that the studies should be of sufficient quality.

So this means that we have to make sure that the quality of the individual studies is um high enough.

But whereas this is true in theory, in practice, this is uh a very difficult issue.

Why?

Well, first of all, quality is a continuum.

It's not a dichotomy.

There is no perfect study.

So even if as a researcher, you permanently have to make decisions and you very often know that there is no perfect decision.

So if you decide option A, you know that there are some disadvantages.

If you choose option B, there are maybe other disadvantages.

So there is no perfect study.

Um but of course there are differences between studies in the size of the quality, but it's a continuum, not a dichotomy.

Another problem is how to judge quality.

If you ask multiple people what a qualitative good study is, probably you will get different answers.

So there are a lot of criteria that can be used and maybe it's also a good idea to use multiple criteria.

But if you use multiple criteria, how are you going to weight this criteria?

If you want to say something about the quality of a study in general, are you going to calculate an average of these criteria and to what criteria you are going to give larger weights than to what other criteria?

Or maybe it's possible that you have 20 criteria and that a study performs well on 19 criteria, but that that study does not perform well on the 20 criterion.

Now based on that you say well this final criterion is for me that important that if a study fails on this criterion I cannot call this study a good study.

Another problem is very often the data to judge quality are not reported.

For instance, um in qualitative good study, assumptions are tested.

Assumptions underlying statistical tests are checked.

But very often uh researchers check these assumptions but simply do not report that they checked these assumptions.

So how can you can you judge the quality based on information that is not complete?

If it's not, if researchers do not report on the check of the assumptions, can you conclude that they did not check the assumptions?

Another problem is the problem of efficiency.

If you are very severe, if you want to include in your math analysis only the studies from with the highest quality, then maybe at the end you will only combine two or three studies.

Whereas if you are more lenient maybe in your meta analysis you can include 20 30 studies and you can say okay the other studies have a lower quality but still studies with a lower quality can still give some information about the population effect size.

Another problem is the problem of bias.

For instance, we know that the internal validity of experimental designs is higher than the internal validity of correlational designs.

But sometimes it's very hard to use an experimental design.

So for instance um if you want to test whether smoking results in lung cancer or an increased probability of lung cancer you cannot use an experimental design in sense that you cannot say to one group of people that is randomly uh um selected.

You cannot say to one group from now on you have to smoke one package a day and to another group that is also randomly selected you cannot say now you cannot uh smoke anymore for two years.

So there are some practical and ethical concerns that make that sometimes you cannot use experimental designs and you will have to use um designs with lower internal validity as an illustration of the lack of consensus.

So I have here an overview of what some organizations said about single case or single subject experimental designs about the value of these designs um to give evidence to be included in the met analysis.

And then you can see that some organizations said well single case experimental designs give persuasive evidence whereas other uh organizations said well they give some evidence but less than uh for instance group comparison designs and some organizations said no single case experimental designs are non-informative at all.

Various free-touse tools or checklists are available online that are meant to evaluate the quality of studies.

Note that on this site you cannot only find checklists for primary studies including RCTs, qualitative studies, diagnostic studies and so on but also to evaluate the quality of systematic reviews and meta analysis.

Also on this page you find several tools for quality appraisal of studies.

The risk of bias 2 tool for instance is good tool to evaluate the quality of randomized trials.

Robins one for assessing the quality of non-randomized trials.

Here you see some questions of the risk of bias 2 tool to get a question some further explanation and then you can give an answer yes probably yes probably no or not indicated hard job.

If you look at these tools, well, in general, these types of um aspects come back regularly.

Construct validity, which is about um how the variables are measured.

External validity is about the generalization or the generalizability of the results.

Internal validity is about um the problem of uh possible confounding variables and then then the statistical conclusion validity is about whether statistical tests are or statistics were used in a correct way.

So these general criteria come back very often in these tools.

Suppose that at the end you assessed the quality of individual studies.

How do you deal with quality then afterwards in your meta analysis?

One option could be that you include only the very best studies.

Or you could also say well because this will reduce the power the precision because in that way I I will only include a few studies maybe it's better to include much more studies and I'm going to exclude only the very worst studies.

Still an alternative is that you include all studies but that you weight the studies according to the quality that you give a larger weight the the larger the quality of a study is.

It's also possible to investigate the effect of quality.

You can include quality as a predictor variable in your meta analysis to look at whether the quality is related to the size of the effect that was observed.

It's also possible to do a kind of sensitivity analysis by performing a meta analysis with all studies and performing a meta analysis only on the better studies and then you compare the results to see whether there is a difference between um highly qualitative studies uh compared to the whole set of studies.

If there is no difference, conclusion is we do not have to worry too much about quality.

The results are not affected by the quality.

If there is difference then it's a good practice to present the results of both analysis and to make sure that the reader of your meta analysis is aware of the problem of assessing the quality and um yeah the difficulty of interpreting the results of your analysis.

So in general some guidelines I would not include studies if they really have a low quality.

I definitely would use several indices for quality.

I also would look for the effect of the design.

So if you have experimental designs and correlational designs, I would also include the type of design as a predictor in the analysis to see whether the effect depends on the design.

It's also a good idea to train coders of the individual studies um coders that um assess the quality of studies to make sure that all coders are assessing the quality in exactly the same way.

And it's also a good idea to assess the size of reliability between uh the coders.

If you code the quality, it's important that you are also transparent about what criteria you used to assess quality.

And an argument that is sometimes given uh for including only peer-reviewed papers is that peer-reviewed papers in general have a higher quality because these papers were already reviewed by experts in the field.

This is true but there is a problem.

I already mentioned that is important that you use very clear and ambiguous in an exclusion criteria.

So this is important for obtaining consistency.

So for instance, this also includes if you uh uh say that uh only studies with a good quality are included that you defined what good quality is for you.

So how you operationalized good quality but not only for consistency also for replicability it's important that you have very clear in and exclusion criteria and that you report on these criteria.

It's also important that the coder so that the person or the persons who make the selection of the studies are trained so that they very that they know very well what the different in and exclusion criteria mean and that they are able that they have the knowledge to judge whether these criteria are met.

It's also a good idea to do at least part of the selection by two independent coders.

Why is that good?

Well, in that way you can study whether um the study selection is done in a reliable way.

So in principle the two coders should come to exactly the same study selection.

If this is not the case then you can look at uh uh you can have again uh have a look at uh the inclusion and exclusion criteria or the operationalization.

So maybe the criteria are not clear yet.

It's also a good idea to report about the reli reliability of the selection process.

So for instance, you could uh uh report on the percentage of agreement.

======================================================================
Meta Analysis 04 Avoiding bias
======================================================================

In the search studies, in the selection of the studies and in the interpretation of the meta analytic results, you have to be aware of the risk of bias.

This is what this screencast is about.

The problem is if you include only papers that are published then the results may be biased.

There can be different kinds of bias. outcome reporting bias which refers to the the idea that maybe researchers will report the results only if the results are going in a specific direction.

So if you include in your meta analysis only studies that you found in the literature so that um results that were reported by the researchers you can get a biased view.

Another issue is publication bias which refers to the problem that what is published may also yeah give a biased view of um the results maybe effects that are positive and that are large are more likely to be p to be published than uh smaller effects or negative effects.

So if you look only at public published effects then maybe you will overestimate the size of the effect.

Another problem is citation bias.

So spectacular effects very large effects are much likely much more likely to be cited frequently.

And so if effects are cited frequently, if studies are cited frequently, then it is much more likely that you will find that study and that you will include it in your meta analysis.

If one study has not been cited yet or has been cited only once for instance, then the probability that you will find that study will be smaller and maybe you will miss that study in your math analysis.

So this will also uh possibly um induce bias.

Another kind of bias is multiple publication bias.

You know that for researchers it's important to publish as much as possible and some researchers when they do when they did a study they try to make multiple publications out of that study.

And so as a metalist you have to be very careful especially if you see that um the same author or the same authors published multiple papers then you have to make clear you have to make sure that these multiple papers are publishing on different data sets otherwise you can include in your meta analysis only one of these papers otherwise you will use the same data multiple times in your math analytic uh study, you will give a larger weight to that study that has been published multiple times.

There can also be a bias in keywords.

Um so it's possible that a specific word um a specific term is used more by specific researchers or in specific subdomains than in other domains.

So if you do not try to use um other keywords um almost synonyms to search for literature, it's possible that you miss part of literature and that you miss systematic um that that your set of studies that you will find is not representative anymore for all studies that were done.

It's also possible that there is bias in the sources that uh are used.

So if you um if you use only uh journal articles then possibly so that are again published uh papers then again this can induce bias.

So it's a good idea to use not only journal articles but maybe also look for books also look for technical reports and so on or conference proceedings and so on.

Um also make sure that by defining the criteria that you use to decide on whether or not include uh individual studies that you make sure that by defining these criteria you do not induce uh bias.

For instance, if you if one of your criteria is that you will include only experimental studies, then it's possible that specific studies or specific uh questions um will be or specific findings will be underrepresented in your meta analysis.

There can also be geographical or language bias.

For instance, if you um include only studies that were published in English, then maybe you will miss a lot of studies that were done, for instance, in China, which are often published in Chinese.

Or you may miss a lot of uh studies that were done in France or in French-speaking countries because they also have their own journals in French language.

And it is possible that for instance in China or in France or the French speakaking countries results are somewhat different than the results in the English-speaking countries or the countries in which a lot of studies were published in English.

So there are several sources of bias.

Let's look at the issue of publication or reporting bias.

There are a there is a lot of evidence for this kind of bias.

For instance, here Edgar and Schmidt did a met analysis on studies studying the um yeah monotherapy calculating agent versus a combination with chemotherapy to treat advanced ovarian cancer. and they did a meta analysis on published trials on published uh experimental studies and on average so they calculated the survival ratio for each study.

So if the probability of surviving is equally high for both kinds of treatment then the survival ratio will be equal to one.

Now they did a meta analysis and they based on the trials that were published and they found that on average the survival ratio is larger than one.

It's about 1 15 and if you look at the confidence interval you can see that one is not included in the confidence interval.

So this means that based on the published data, their conclusion is well the combination with chemotherapy is more effective.

It's statistically more effective than the monotherapy calculating agent only.

But they repeated this meta analysis including all studies that were included uh that were registered.

Um so note that some organizations if they give fundings to do research they require that the results are sent regardless of what results are and these results will be included in register the research register.

So you can consider this register or the published trials as a sub set of the registered trials.

And if you look at all trials that were registered then you see that on average the survival ratio is only slightly slightly larger than one and now the confidence interval includes one.

So based on all trials, so published and unpublished trials, the conclusion is no, we do not see really a difference between the monotherapy calculating agent versus combination with chemotherapy.

Whereas if you look at the published trials, you can see that difference.

So this could be an indication of publication bias in the sense that more spectacular results.

Studies that found a large difference between the two are more likely to be published or researchers are more likely to report these results.

So this can be an indication of reporting bias and publication wise.

Another example, Krishnanovski Kanovska uh looked at the proportion of studies that were published after five years after a conference conferences of the Society of Clinical Oncology.

And I found that for studies that found significant results, the probability that these results will be published after five years after the conference is 81%.

Whereas for the non-significant results, only 68% of these studies were published after 5 years.

So again, this is an indication of outcome uh reporting bias or publication bias.

So it's possible that researchers did not send non-significant results to journals or if they sent it to journals maybe these results were not published because they were not significant. some other indications.

Well, um if yeah, Finelli uh in 2012 looked at um a set of papers a large set of papers in psychology and psych psychiatry and they found that in 95% of the test null hypothesis um these null hypothesis were rejected.

Whereas if you look at the size of uh the samples and if you look at what reasonable estimate of population effect size is then you see that the statistical power is only about uh 35%.

So you would expect that um the probability of rejecting a null hypothesis is only about 35%.

But still in most of the studies that are published the null hypothesis is rejected.

Another example is uh in the reproducibility project they found that um that yeah in a lot of large studies um significant results were found but um it was very hard to replicate these uh significant results.

So if other research groups were trying to do exactly the same study very often they did not find a significant result anymore.

So it is possible that in reality there was no significant uh there is no effect but in a specific study a significant effect was found and this significant effect was uh uh was submitted to a journal and was published.

Whereas in other studies maybe no effect was found but these results were not published or not sent to a journal.

These results one explanation for these results is that uh researchers fabricated or falsified or modified the results in order to make sure that the results are statistically significant.

A somewhat less pessimistic um explanation is that researchers um are using B hacking which means that well you know as a researcher you can you have a lot of freedom in how you analyze the data.

You can include coariantss or not include coariantss.

You can often do multiple tests.

You can uh uh you can for instance use an analysis of variance, but you can also use uh regression analysis.

And maybe the results or the conclusion will depend slightly on what type of analysis you did.

And it is possible that some researchers or it is practice that some researchers are doing multiple analysis and only report the results of analysis that show significant results and fail to send or report uh the non-significant results to a journal.

So this is what is called P hacking.

So people are looking for significant results by doing a lot of analysis and only selecting significant results.

So to illustrate that this problem of publication bias is a real problem and to illustrate where it could come from here.

Um yeah part of a letter that we received from an editor of a chi scientific journal to which we submitted a paper reporting on a study we have done.

So when we do a study and we write a paper, we send that paper to an editor of a journal.

That editor often reads the paper and then decides um to send that paper out to several experts throughout the world uh to ask the opinion of these experts on whether this paper can be published or not.

Very often experts will give comments, will give suggestions to improve the paper and then uh the authors revise the paper and submit it again after which maybe the paper will be accepted for publication.

So, but here we sent our paper to a journal and the editor mailed back to us and he said, "Well, I have decided not to send out your manuscript for full review because the effects you were you found are very small in magnitude and so this could be interpreted as relatively trivial by readers.

We replied to the editor that this is exactly the problem or this is exactly the process that may lead to publication buys.

If only spectacular effects will be published and small effects are looked at or are considered as trivial and therefore not published.

Then we get a biased view because as we have seen in our simulation study and in the other studies you can expect that if there is a population effect that sometimes your observed effect will be smaller sometimes it will be larger.

So if we if we if we submit and if we publish only the largest effects then we we will get an overestimate of our population effect size when we calculate the mean effect that we find in the literature.

But of course the editor did not reply anymore.

Um fortunately we sent it to another journal and our paper was was published in the other journal. a very similar experience um which is much more recent um so again we submitted the paper to a journal and the editor said um yeah I'm not going to publish this paper there are some issues with that problem with that paper but if your findings had been particularly large or striking then having only measured engagement once a year might not have been a concern.

So again based on the size of the effect the editor made a decision.

So again this is disappointing.

This is um the underlying process of publication bias.

So to summarize, there is no reason why an effect size that is not statistically significant is less interesting as an effect that is not that is statistically significant.

On the contrary, if in reality there is no effect, then I want to know that there is no effect.

There is a problem that in the situation in the scenario where there is no effect but sometimes by coincidence a study finds a an effect and only these studies are published.

In that way people will think that there is an effect.

So it's equally important to publish non-significant effects.

But of course if there is if you do not find a significant effect this can also be due to other reasons which may be good reasons for not publishing your results.

For instance it's possible that uh you have a very very underpowered study.

So you have a very small study and therefore um your results are very inaccurate.

Your estimate is very inaccurate imprecise. uh the statistical power is very small and therefore the probability of finding a statistically significant effect is very small.

It's also possible that you are looking at an hypothesis that simply does not make sense.

For instance, if you would do a study studying whether drinking one glass of water water each morning after two years will lead to larger ears.

Why would you expect such an uh such an association?

If you do not have reasons to expect such an association, then it also does not make sense to study this association and it may not be worthwhile to publish these kinds of studies.

Or it's possible that your treatment that you are study studying is not uh implemented in a good way and that this is the reason why you do not find an effect of this treatment.

So there can be reasons why studies should not be published but there is a problem if a study of high quality is not published because the results are statistically not significant. to illustrate citation bias.

Um well, we have done um a meta analysis uh yeah several years ago on the effects of early prevention programs for families with young children at risk for physical child abuse and neglect.

As I look at the distribution of all the observed effect sizes so in bold we have our uh mean effect size with confidence interval.

You can see that the mean effect size was around30 um which is considered a small effect or a moderate effect.

But there was one study with an observed effect size that was very large about 1.2 and it was striking when we were looking at the literature that that one single study was cited a lot of times.

So very often it was said that prevention programs um are effective and then this single study was cited.

So because in this single study a large effect was found uh this study was uh cited much more.

So again, readers of the literature can get a biased view because this is the study that receives a lot of attention and therefore people may think that the effect indeed is very large.

But the reality it seems that the effect is much smaller than the effect found in that single study.

And probably this it may be due to coincidence that in that study such a large effect was found.

In coming videos we will see that there are some techniques that can be used to detect bias and to correct for bias.

Unfortunately these techniques do not always work well.

For instance the type one erate may not be under control and the power may be low.

Therefore, it is better to avoid bias.

To that end, you can try to find also unpublished literature, also called gray literature.

For instance, by making use of databases that are exactly developed with that goal.

You can also contact research groups that are active in the domain to ask whether they have done other studies that were not published and if so, if they're willing to share the results.

And of course, it's important that you try to avoid bias in your own research.

Therefore, report all findings regarding your research interest or questions regardless of their significance.

======================================================================
Meta Analysis 05 Data extraction
======================================================================

After selecting the studies, we are ready to extract the data needed for our meta analysis.

This is the fourth step of the eight steps of a meta analysis.

What data do we want to extract?

Of course, effect sizes.

We want to say something about the size of the effect.

So uh sometimes effect sizes are immediately reported in the papers but sometimes we have to calculate the effect sizes and we now extract summary data test statistics p values and so on that can be used to calculate effect sizes afterwards.

But we are not only interested in the size of the effect but we are also interested in the confidence about the size of the effect.

So we also want to um extract data like standard errors, the sample size, test statistics, p values because these also give an idea about um yeah how precise the size of the effect was estimated.

Typically in a meta analysis, we do not only estimate only a mean effect size, but we also are interested in um yeah study characteristics that are related to the effect size.

So it's also a good idea to uh extract other information about the studies like for instance characteristics of participants the way the dependent variable and treatment was operationalized uh some contextual elements the tests that were used the design that was used the quality of the study and so on.

So this is not only interesting for doing moderator analysis afterwards, but it's also a good idea in your systematic review that you give a clear overview of um how the studies that you found look like.

This means that you will collect a lot of data.

Um how are you going to collect these data?

Well, it can be a good idea or it is a good idea to use a coding scheme.

Um, so for instance, one sheet, one paper for each or one document for each study or for part of the study.

Um so if you extract data it's always a good idea to well you could for instance copy exact um sentences from the original paper but what is important is that you also clearly mention um yeah the page numbers so that afterwards if you want to go back if you do not uh remember very well what that meant or if you you want to know more about the context in which that sentence was given given you can easily find back uh uh that part in the text.

Note that it's it is better to code somewhat too much than too little.

I mean if out after afterwards you you say well maybe I also need information on that characteristic and you did not code that yet then it is much more work to uh extract the data um or yeah it's much more work if you have to look at all individual studies again to look for that uh variable.

It's better to coat a characteristic uh too much even if you use if you will not use it afterwards anymore than uh one too little.

But of course also pay attention um so if you have a very long coding scheme.

So if you want to extract a lot of information it can also very time consuming.

So also think about what information I will use afterwards so that you do not code far too much.

So here is an example of such a coding uh form.

So uh yeah so these are some study characteristics and so in the blanks you fill in that information for the study.

So afterwards, so when you uh filled in these coding forms, um it is probably a good idea that you use uh a spreadsheet uh program like Excel uh to bring together all these data so that afterwards you can analyze them in a statistical program or in a program specifically for meta analysis.

So here for this study I used or we used uh several uh sheets.

So in the first sheet you see in the first sheet we have one line for each study.

And so in the first column in column A you can see the study ID.

So the first study was study 10,01.

So in the second column you have the publication year which was 2012.

In the second column you have the publication type.

I think one was published and two was unpublished.

And then in the fourth column you have another uh characteristic.

So here you have an overview of all studies that were found.

So probably another column is the authors um and so on or the complete reference.

In a second sheet, we have here um again the study ID but now we also have an additional column sample ID and you see that for some studies like study 10,2 you have two samples.

So in that study two groups of persons were studied.

The same is true for study uh 108.

So also there there were two samples.

So whereas the first sheet had one line for each study, in this sheet we have one line for each sample, for the majority of the studies there was indeed only one sample but for some studies there were more than one sample.

And then in the following columns you have some uh yeah uh characteristics of these samples.

In a third sheet you have the results results that will be used afterwards to calculate effect sizes or yes this was a study about uh uh reliability coefficients.

What you see here in the last column are the alphas, so the reliability coefficients.

But for some studies and for some studies and for some samples you had different skills that were given to these samples like for instance in uh in study 10,03.

So in sample one there was the scale laca lart and laca l pierce.

So two different subs skills of uh the laca scale and so for each of these subscals you have an alpha coefficient.

So in that way by using multiple sheets um yeah it is possible to yeah to keep the number of variables and the number of rows limited.

Of course, it's important that you can link these different sheets to each other.

So, um, make sure that in the tree sheets then you have the same variable names like for instance ID study and ID sample.

Also for the data extraction it's important that you make sure that this is done in a reliable way.

So also here you have to make sure that your coding scheme is very clear.

So again for consistency but also for replicability it's important that this uh scheme is very clear and that you report on that scheme as well or that you make it somewhere available uh as supplementary material uh linked to your paper for instance.

Also here the coders should be trained.

Also here it is a good idea uh to let at least part of the coding done by two independent coders and to report on the reliability.

======================================================================
Meta Analysis 06 Effect size calculation
======================================================================

In this session, we will look at the effect size calculation.

The calculation of effect sizes is one of the most important and one of the most difficult steps in the in the execution of a meta analysis.

Very often we are combining the results of several studies that are reported in the literature and very often the raw data are not reported.

Instead we calculate effect sizes effect sizes that summarize uh the results of these individual studies.

In our meta analysis effect sizes are the dependent variable.

For instance, if you are doing an analysis of variance or regression analysis in your meta analysis, you are going to predict uh the size of the effect.

So the effect size is a dependent variable in our meta analysis.

Very often we use a standardized effect size because we want to compare the results over studies.

There are a lot of effect size measures.

We already used before the standardized mean difference.

We also looked already at the risk ratio.

But there are many other effect size indices.

For instance, the correlation coefficient, odds ratio, the loss ratio and so on.

Before we can combine effect sizes in a meta analysis, we have to make sure that the same effect size is used for all studies.

So we have to convert the data or the results to one common measure.

Why do we use effect sizes?

Look at this example.

So suppose in a specific study one tests the difference in the size of tumors in an experimental and a control group.

If people see that the p value that is testing this difference is equal to.11 a lot of persons would conclude no there is no there is no difference uh in the size of tumors.

This is however not a correct conclusion.

So the p value states so the the relatively large p value states that there is not enough evidence against the null hypothesis to conclude that the null hypothesis is not true but this does not mean that the null hypothesis is true and one um one common problem in studies is a lack of power.

So it is possible that the p value is not very small.

Not because there is no effect and maybe the effect that was observed in the study was also not very small but rather because the study was a relatively small study and so the confidence interval is relatively large and the confidence interval therefore includes zero.

So concluding if we cannot reject the null hypothesis, concluding that the null hypothesis is correct is not a good conclusion.

And what about this p value?

So suppose that the p value is very small, smaller than 0.001.

Very often researchers conclude there is a large differences difference in the size of tumors between an experimental and a control group.

Also this conclusion is not the correct conclusion.

Suppose that you have a very large study so that you have two very large groups large experimental and a large control group.

In that situation, the confidence interval will be very small.

And even if the difference between uh the the sizes of the tumors or the mean size and tumors is relatively small, still this difference can be highly significant if the two experimental and control groups are very large.

So a very small p value does not necessarily mean that there is a large difference in the size of tumors.

It can also mean that we simply have a very large uh study and therefore we are highly convinced that there is a difference but this does not necessarily mean that the difference is large.

So these are the two uh misconceptions.

So a failure to reject the null hypothesis implies that there is no effect that the null hypothesis is true.

Another common misconception is that a statistically significant p value implies a large effect and the larger the p value the larger the effect.

As I tried to make clear already, this is not true because the test or the results of a significance test also depends on the size of the study.

So look at this formula or this um this equation presented by Rosenal.

He said well a test statistic is function of the size of the effect and the size of the study.

To make this more um concrete, look at the t value from a two sample t test.

So the t statistic is calculated by um calculating the difference between the sample means.

We divide it by the pool standard deviation multiplied by the square root of 1 / n + 1 / n c.

So, NE and 1 C uh and C are the sample sizes of the two groups.

We already looked at the observed effect size, the observed standardized mean difference which is defined as a difference between the sample means divided by the pulled standard deviation.

So it is clear that there is a strong relationship between the t statistic and the standardized mean difference.

More specifically the t statistic is equal to effect the effect size times 1 / the square root of 1 / n + 1 / n c.

So indeed this is an illustration of the formula of rotal.

So the t statistic depends on the effect size as well as on uh the size of the study.

The larger the study, the larger t, the larger the effect size, the larger t.

And so this makes that if we have a very large study, then even for small standardized mean differences, the t value can be large. the other way around.

It's possible that um even for very large effects, observed effect sizes, the t statistic will not be large and so the p value will not be uh very small in case of small sample sizes.

I do not want to say that test statistics are not important or that they're not valuable.

On the contrary, they are very valuable.

But at the same time, we do not only want to say something about whether there is an effect, but we also want to estimate the size of the effect.

And therefore, more and more uh journals, but also for instance the APA publication manual stresses the importance of also mentioning reporting effect size measures.

So the effect size to summarize expresses the magnitude of the effect or the relationship between variables and independently of the size of the study.

A remark regarding the name effect sizes.

Effect sizes sometimes express the size of the effect in experimental and quasy experimental studies.

So in studies in which u an independent variable a treatment variable is manipulated.

So for instance in a group comparison design with an experimental control and a experimental group and a control group in which um the treatment is given in the experimental group and no treatment or placebo is given in the control group or in within subject design in which um one group of subjects receives multiple treatments.

So first for instance is uh the group is measured without the treatment and then the treatment starts and the group is measured again.

So in these situations it makes sense to express or to talk about effect sizes because in this situation it is clear that if we find a correlation or an association between the condition and the outcome variable then it makes sense to assume that this association is due to the treatment.

However, the term effect sizes is also used to refer to assessation measures in non-experimental studies.

For instance, to compare existing groups.

For instance, we already looked at the difference between male and female students in the performance on a mathematics exam.

An alternative scenario is where you express the association between continuous variable variables.

For instance, you can uh use a correlation coefficient to express the relationship between school size and the performance.

Also in this situation, these association measures are often called effect sizes.

But here we have to be very prudent.

I mean suppose that um we find that correlation between school size and performance is negative in the sense that in smaller schools students perform worse or that's a positive correlation.

Can we talk about an effect?

We have to be very prudent in interpreting this correlation.

It is possible that it's not because the school is small that students perform worse.

It is possible for instance that smaller schools often are found in rural areas in which um parents have a lower educational level.

It's also possible that in the these rural areas um there is a much less offer of cultural activities and all these factors can make that students perform worse.

So it's maybe not due to the fact that the school is small that students perform worse.

It's possible that uh students perform worse because the school size is associated with other variables and that are these other variables that affect the performance.

So if we observe a correlation, we have to make sure that we interpret this correlation correctly that we do not immediately interpret this correlation as an effect.

But still in a metalytic literature very often correlations and and other measures of association are called effect sizes.

So pay attention with the term effect sizes.

It's okay to use the term effect sizes, but keep in mind that this does not necessarily mean that there is indeed in an effect of one variable on the other variable.

Sometimes in a meta analysis we are combining for instance chromebox alphas.

So these are measures that express um to what extent um a test is reliable to what extent different items of a of an instrument are related to each other.

So here it does not make sense to talk about an effect but still in metaic literature we uh often chromach alphas are called effect sizes as well and in some analysis we even do not look at the association between two variables.

For instance suppose that you are interested in the prevalence rate of dyslexia.

So maybe this has or probably this has been studied in multiple studies and you can combine all these prevalence rates and you can study whether um there is heterogeneity in rates and if there is heterogeneity you can study you can explore whether you can find characteristics of the studies that are related to the prevalence rates.

So you can again do a meta analysis on these metrics in much the same way as we um can do a meta analysis on correlations or standardized mean differences.

But here the metric is a characteristic or is a a statistic regarding one single variable and not the association between variables.

So again this is very important association is not the same as a causal relationship.

So before you conclude based on correlation coefficient for instance based on an observed association that there is one variable that is influencing the other variable you have to check clearly the internal validity of your design.

You have to make sure that there are no compounding variables that can explain the association.

How can you interpret effect sizes?

Well, sometimes unstandardized effect sizes are used because sometimes interpretation of effect sizes is clear from the beginning.

Suppose for instance um you start a campaign um a campaign to try to reduce um the smoking in uh in youngsters.

You can express the effect of that campaign by looking at the number of cigarettes that are were smoked before the campaign and the number of cigarettes per person that were smoked after the campaign.

You do not have to standardize this mean difference.

It's clear immediately for all readers of your report what you mean by this mean difference.

And if in multiple studies exactly the same measure is used.

So in in multiple studies they look at the mean difference in the number of cigarettes smoked. then you do not have to standardize this in effect size before combining them in a meta analysis.

Some people still find it hard to interpret a standardized mean difference.

If you look at this website, if you go to this website, you can see how you can uh interpret a standardized mean difference of for instance two.

One interpretation is well suppose that you have two normal distributions, two normal population distributions.

If the difference the standardized mean difference is equal to two, then this means that 98% about 98% of the scores of the light blue distribution is larger than the mean of the dark blue distribution.

Another interpretation is there is about 32% of overlap between the two population distributions.

A third interpretation is suppose that you would take randomly one person from the control condition and randomly one person from the treatment condition.

Then there is a probability of about 92% that the person from the treatment condition will have a higher score than the person from the control condition.

And then the final interpretation is that suppose that you consider the 20% highest scores of the control condition as scores that are okay.

So that you use a specific cutoff score above which 20% of the control condition is situated.

Then you have to treat 148 people from that control condition to have an expected number of persons above that uh above that cutoff equal to 100.

So if you want to bring 100 persons above that cut cutoff then you have to treat 148 of these of uh people from the control condition. also for the correlation coefficient.

Um this site can be used to look at how you can interpret correlations.

Thanks to the fact that these that effect sizes are standardized, we can use rules of temp.

So Cohen for instance uh suggested several rules of terms by looking at um how effect sizes were interpreted by researchers in a lot of studies in the behavioral sciences.

And he found that if the the standardized mean difference is about 20 that very often authors called u the observed effect relatively small.

If the effect size was equal to 0 50 then this effect is often called medium and if the effect size is equal to 80 then often researchers call uh the mean difference a large difference.

You can also see um correlations and uh the proportions of variance explained.

Um so R and R squared and you can see um what values correspond to small effects, medium effects and large effects, Note that sometimes small effects can still be impressive and I recommend you to read the paper of Brenta Miller because it's uh yeah it's a very interesting paper.

So they argue that sometimes small effects are indeed impressive and they give some um examples.

For instance, they give an example of an experiment experiment in which um students sitting in a library.

Some students are given a cookie.

Other students are not given a cookie.

And then afterwards when these students come out of the library, there is an old woman who wants to cross the street and and apparently has problems in uh in crossing the street.

And it was found that students who got before one simple cookie, they were more willing to help that old lady than students who were not given a cookie.

The effect was not huge, but apprentice and Miller conclude that this effect is impressive.

It's impressive that by giving a very small cookie to persons, these persons are more willing to help other people.

So you would not expect that there is an effect, but still there is an effect.

It's a small effect, but because you do not expect it, it's still impressive.

Another example, they also give the example of um of an of experiments or an experiment in which um members of a jury in a trial in court seems to be affected by the physical attractiveness of the defendants.

So it's an experiment.

Um so it was not it was a fake trial but of course the people from the jury did not know that it was a fake trial and in one group um the defendant was a very physical attractive women woman in another group the defendant was not attractive at all and it was found that the jury members uh judged differently so were apparently affected by the physical attraction effectiveness of the defendant.

Again, the effect was not very large, but still it is uh it is an impressive effect because again, you would not expect that there is an effect.

You would expect that people are doing their best um the best they can to remain objective and and probably they did their best to be objective, but still they were affected by the physical attractiveness of the defendants.

So note that the size of the effect is not equal to the practical significance.

So we have seen that you have the statistical significance.

This is not the same as the size of the effect the effect size because uh the statistical significance also depends on the size of the study.

But very often in the literature people say well you have statistical significance and you have practical significance which is which is expressed uh in a measure of effect size but the size of the effect still is not the same as a practical significance because the practical significance also depends on for instance the cost of the treatment.

So suppose that by washing hands you can you can have a small effect um or or you can by washing your hands you can have a large effect on uh the number of cases with flu versus by vaccination you can have the same effect.

So the size of the effect can be the same in the two situations for the two treatments.

But still the practical significance of washing your hands is larger because it's it's a very easy measure to take.

It's it does not cost money.

Everybody can do it.

So the practical significance of this treatment is larger.

Another example severity of the problem under investigation.

Suppose that by washing your hands you can avoid having flu or um um being affected by the corona virus on one hand or by washing your hands you can avoid common colds.

Suppose that the effect is the same.

The size of the effect is the same.

In that case, the practical significance is larger for corona virus because this problem is a larger problem is is more severe.

The same is true for the extent of the problem.

If we can tackle um a very extensive problem, a problem that is uh that is everywhere with a simple solution.

The practical significance of this solution or this treatment is larger than if you can uh help um um solving a problem that is not very common.

Calculation of effect sizes.

Um, there are a lot of effect sizes.

We already have seen a few effect sizes, but I tried to make an overview of some effect sizes of commonly used effect sizes, but this is not um an exhaustive overview.

There are much more effect sizes than the ones I mentioned here.

So I try to to categorize effect sizes according to uh the measurement level of the dependent variable and the measurement level of the independent variable.

Let's look first at a situation where you have two dichotomus variables.

So suppose for instance you want to predict using a test whether somebody will fail or succeed in the final exam at university. and you collect data.

Suppose that these are the data then you hope that based on your predictive test you can predict as good as possible the final exam score.

So you can predict whether the person will uh fail or not.

So suppose that one stands for success and zero stands for a failure.

Same for the predictive test.

Is there an association between the two tests?

Or in other words, can you predict whether somebody will fail or succeed on the final exam based on the result of the predictive test?

If you look at the data, then apparently this is the case.

If one you can see that 150 persons uh succeeded on the predictive test and the majority of them also succeeded on the final exam.

So 130 people from these 150 people uh succeeded from the 50 people who failed the predictive test also a majority but a small majority succeeded on the final exam.

So there seems to be an association between the two.

This is more easy uh to see this if you calculate uh proportions.

So you can see that from all people who succeeded on the predictive test, 87% succeeded on the final exam.

Whereas this is only the case for 60% of the people who uh failed on the predictive test.

So how can we calculate a measure that expresses the size of association between the two variables?

One possible way is to calculate the difference in risks.

Uh so the difference in the probability of succeeding the final exam for the two uh conditions for uh people who did not fail and people who failed on the predictive test.

And you can see that the probability is 27% higher uh for people who succeeded on the predictive test.

So this is the difference between the risks.

An alternative measure that is also very often used and that we already uh have seen before in the first session is the relative risk or the risk ratio.

So it is 87 uh 87% divided by 60%.

Which gives us a value ratio of 1.45.

So this means that if one succeeded on the uh predictive test then the probability is 1.4. 45 times higher that the person will also succeed on the final exam compared to people who did not succeed on the predictive test.

Note that these are two measures for exactly the same data but the values are completely different 27 and 1.45.

Still another measure that is very often used is a fi coefficient. five coefficient giving a value of 29 again another value.

Another measure that is very often used is odds ratio.

This odds ratio gives a value of 4.33 and also very often used is the lo odds ratio which is a natural logarithm of the odds ratio giving a value of 1.47.

So you see for the same situation for the same kinds of data you can calculate multiple metrics and it's important to note here that these different measures also give different values.

So you cannot simply say that the effect size for this data is for instance 1.45.

You have to mention what type of effect size you calculated or what measure of effect size, what measure of assessation you calculated.

If you would have um from multiple studies effect size metrics for these kinds of data for 2x two tables, then you have to make sure that the effect size metric that is used in all these studies is exactly the same.

Otherwise it does not make sense to combine these effect sizes over studies.

Another situation suppose you have an ordinal or an interval dependent variable and a dichomous independent variable.

So suppose you have two groups and you compare these two you compare the scores on an ordinal or interval variable in these two groups.

We already have seen the standardized mean difference calculated as the difference between the sample means divided by the pulled standard deviation.

Pooling standard deviations make sense if we can assume that there is a common population standard deviation so that in both uh conditions the standard deviation of the population is exactly the same.

If this is not the case and and this for instance suppose that the treatment has an effect has has not the same effect on all persons then this could make that in the treatment condition the variation between persons in the performance on the outcome variable is larger than in the control condition.

In that situation it does not make sense to use pulled standard deviation to calculate a standardized mean difference.

An alternative that was proposed by class is uh to standardize uh the mean difference by dividing by the standard deviation from the control group only.

Still another situation suppose that you have one group that is measured before and after a treatment.

What is sometimes used is a standardized mean difference uh based on gain scores.

So the the mean gain for for each person the gain or the difference is calculated between um the score after a treatment and the score before the treatment.

And then a mean difference score is calculated and this is divided by the standard deviation of these different scores.

An alternative measure is a standardized mean difference in which you calculate the difference between the post mean and the pre-mean and you divide it by the standard deviation of the precores.

Sometimes you have a combination of these two two designs.

You have two groups an experimental group and a control group.

But the experimental group and the control group is measured before sorry in the beginning of the experiment and after the treatment uh started.

So here in this situation you can calculate this uh standardized mean difference.

So in fact you calculate uh for both conditions first standardized mean difference and then you calculate the difference between these two standardized mean differences.

Still other measures are nonparametric and robust measures.

For instance, sometimes uh or some people proposed to use the the difference between medians rather than the difference between means because medians are more robust against uh outlying values.

Still another measure is a point by serial correlation coefficient.

So it's it's a correlation coefficient calculated between um a dichomous variable 01 variable on one side and um the scores on uh the dependent or the yeah a continuous variable on the other side.

Another group of measures um can be used in in a situation where you have a nominal dependent variable and a nominal independent variable.

So again there are multiple measures that can be calculated.

I'm not going to uh to give details on these measures.

But what I want to say is suppose that you have a table like this.

So you have two nominal uh or categorical variables and based on this table this frequency table it looks like the experimental condition performs better.

So the treatments seems to have a positive effect in the sense that a lot of people um have less symptoms of the illness in the uh experimental condition whereas in the control condition uh for a lot of people the amount of uh symptoms remain the same during the experiment.

So in this table it seems that there is a positive effect of the treatment.

You can calculate uh a couple of measures measures that were included in the table that I've shown on the previous slide.

But look at this situation here.

I changed control.

I switched the labels of control and experimental.

So based on this data, the conclusion would be no, the experimental condition or the treatment is making the situation worse compared to the control condition.

But if you would calculate the measures that were given on the previous slide, then for the two tables, you would obtain exactly the same values.

So this is a real problem um especially for met analysis.

If you would uh use measures of effect for uh expressing the size of assessation between two categorical variables.

These measures do not give a direction.

They do not say in what direction the effect is observed.

And here in the third table again you would get exactly the same values uh for the the matrix whereas again the situation is different.

Here I switched um uh the labels better and same.

So again the interpretation of the effect size is different but the value for the effect size is exactly the same.

So this is problematic for math analysis.

Suppose that you would uh uh find in one study the first table in the second study the second table.

So in the two studies you would find the same effect size measure.

Um so if you would in your meta analysis calculate the mean effect then the mean effect would be equal to um yeah the the effect size that you found in the two studies.

But because the effect is going in the two in two different directions in the two studies, the conclusion should rather be that there is no effect at all on average.

What if you have a nominal or categorical independent variable and an ordinal or interval variable uh as a dependent variable?

Well, in this, so for instance, what if you would uh have an analysis of variance in a specific study?

Well, what you could do is you could calculate multiple standardized mean differences.

So for each pair of groups, for each pair of categories, you can calculate uh the mean difference and you can standardize it by dividing this stand this mean difference by a pulled standard deviation or you can look at the proportion of variance that is um that is explained by the categorical uh independent variable.

What if you have uh two interval variables?

In that situation again you can calculate multiple measures uh for instance correlation coefficient of Pearson.

But if you have ordinal uh variables then it's better to use a Spearman correlation and so on.

What effect size can you use in case uh regression analysis was done?

Look first at a simple linear regression analysis.

So with Y being regressed on a predictor X.

In this situation, the regression weight of X can be estimated as the correlation between X and Y multiplied by the ratio of the standard deviations.

So note that if X and Y would be standardized then the standard deviations would become one and then B would become equal to the correlation.

So a correlation coefficient which is very often used as a measure of association or measure of effect is in fact a regression coefficient. it's a standardized regression coefficient.

But if there is no need to standardize the data, then also uh regression coefficients can be considered as effect size measures.

Suppose that X the predictor variable is not continuous but dichomous with zero for instance for the control condition, one for the experimental condition. then the estimate of B is equal to the difference between the sample means.

So again you can see that a mean difference which is often used as a measure of effect is in fact a regression coefficient and a standardized mean difference therefore is equal to a standardized regression coefficient.

If your dependent variable would be uh divided by uh the standard deviation of E, so the residual standard deviation, then your regression rate uh of X would be a standardized mean difference.

Suppose that your dependent variable is a dichotomus variable.

In that case, you can use logistic regression analysis.

So your dependent variable now is the logit of the probability that y is equal to 1.

So the logit which is equal to the natural logarithm of the odds odds which is equal to b the probability that y is equal to 1 divided by the probability that y is equal to zero.

So the lo odds is equal uh in our model to a + b x.

What is now b? b is in fact a lo odds ratio.

So b is the difference between um the lo odds for the experimental condition and the control condition.

And the difference between two logarithms is a logarithm of the ratio.

Um so the difference between lo odds is equal to the log of the ratio of the two odds.

So it's it's the lo odds ratio.

So the lo odds ratio which is very often used especially in biomedical sciences is also regression coefficient.

Now the sampling distribution of effect sizes.

Why is this important for a meta analysis?

Well, it's important to know what a sampling distribution is of an effect size measure for multiple reasons.

First reason is that typical metalytic uh techniques assume that the effect size uh that is used follows a normal distribution so that the sampling distribution is a normal distribution.

A second reason is that we need to have an idea of what the precision is of the effect size measure before we combine effect size measures in a math analysis.

Because a precision is used to weight effect sizes in the meta analysis and it's also used to calculate the precision of our uh final mean estimate.

Look at the standardized mean difference.

Indeed, a standardized mean difference follows a normal or the sampling distribution of the standardized mean difference is a normal distribution with mean equal to the population standardized mean difference and with a variance.

A variance that can be estimated.

Variance is equal to the ratio between um of necid * nc plus the delta squared.

So the population effect size divided by two times the total sample size.

Of course we cannot calculate this sampling variance but because we do not know delta.

But what is very often done in meta analysis is you replace delta uh by G.

So you replace the population effect size by the observed effect size and then you get a rather good estimate of the sampling variance of G of an observed effect size.

So if the group sizes are equal and if the group sizes are relatively large compared to the standardized mean difference itself then the sampling variance is more or less equal to 4 divided by the total sample size.

What about correlation coefficient?

Well also the correlation coefficient has a sampling distribution that is more or less normal.

The mean of the sampling distribution is the population correlation coefficient and the variance is equal to 1 minus r row squared squared divided by the total sample size.

Now there are several problems however with this uh uh association measure.

The first problem is that sampling distribution is only approximate approximately normal especially if row is close to zero uh uh close to minus one or + one.

Suppose that the population correlation coefficient is 95.

In that situation, observed correlation coefficients cannot be much larger than the population correlation because u correlation coefficients cannot be larger by definition than one.

But observed correlations can be much smaller than the population correlation of 95.

So the sampling distribution will become skewed especially if you have small samples.

So the sampling distribution is only approximately normal.

A second problem is there is some bias.

The expected value of um the observed correlation is not exactly equal to the population correlation.

And the third problem is the bias but also the sampling variance depends strongly on the um the population correlation.

So here again to estimate the sampling variance we could replace row by r.

But here this a small deviation of R from the population correlation can result in a in a large difference in the estimate of the sampling variance.

A solution is to calculate a Fiser Z transformation transformed value. and fishery set is equal to.5 * the natural logarithm of 1 + the observed correlation divided by one minus the correlation.

So the advantage is that the sampling distribution of the fisher z value is more or less equal to a normal distribution.

Another another advantage is that the sampling variance now is can be easily estimated. it is equal to 1 divided by the sample size minus 3.

Note that now the sampling variance does not depend anymore on the size of the effect.

So what is very often done if uh in multiple studies correlations were observed and we want to combine these correlations.

Well, we first uh perform um or we use a fisher set transformation to convert these correlations to the fisher z scores.

We perform a met analysis on the fisher z values.

So you calculate the the mean fisher z for instance and then afterwards you and and you also calculate an a confidence interval around uh the fisher z the mean fisher z value and then afterwards you back transform these values.

So you back transform the confidence limits and you back transform the mean fisher set towards the r scale.

A third measure that is very often used is the odds ratio.

So odds ratio that can be calculated if you have a 2x2 table.

So um suppose that you that the cells are a b c and d then the odds ratio is equal to a * d divided by b * c.

Again we have the problem that odds ratio has a asymmetric distribution.

So suppose that um suppose that there is no association at all in the population.

So in that situation um the odds ratio in the population will be equal to one.

But the observed odds ratios can be smaller than one and can be larger than one.

But obser cannot be smaller than zero.

So about half of the observed effect sizes would be uh values between zero and one whereas the other half would be values between one and plus infinity.

So again you have a skewed distribution.

Another drawback is that the standard error formula is also a complex uh formula. solution is here again to perform a transformation.

More specifically, very often the natural logarithm is taken of the odds ratio.

The advantage is that the sampling distribution now becomes more or less normal.

So symmetric and normal and that the sampling variance is uh easily be estimated more specifically.

It's equal to 1 / a plus 1 / b + 1 / c plus 1 / d. choosing a measure.

So we have seen that there are a lot of measures.

I did not ex um explain all the measures from the table and on top of that there are much more additional measures.

How do you choose a measure?

So first of course the measure you use depends on the design.

For instance if you have two uh and on the measurement level for instance if you have two continuous variables then you can use correlation coefficient.

If you have two dichoamous variables, you can use a loss ratio.

Secondly, it's often a good idea to use a standardized measure to make sure that you can compare the values over multiple studies.

Third, you have to be aware that sometimes assumptions are made.

We already looked at the standardized mean difference um in which the standardization was done by dividing by a pulled standard deviation.

This only makes sense if the assumption that the two population standard deviations are the same is reasonable otherwise it may be better to use classes delta.

So dividing the mean difference by uh the standard deviation from from the control condition.

A fourth criterion is a popularity.

So standardized mean differences loss ratios correlation coefficients are very often used.

People are familiar with these values with these measures.

So it can be a good idea to use these measures in your meta analysis.

Fifth, simplicity of a measure.

The lost for instance is somewhat hard to interpret.

The risk difference is much easier to understand.

So that could be an argument to choose for a risk difference.

Another criterion is that it is a good idea to use a directional effect size.

So if um if for instance you are looking at two continuous variables then it's a good idea to use R but it's not a good idea to use R squar R R squar would uh give an idea of what the proportion of variance would be if you would predict one of the variables based on the other variables based on the other variable.

But a drawback of R squar is that it is not directional.

So it's possible that in one study a negative correlation was found.

In another study a positive correlation was found.

So on average there is no correlation.

There's no association.

But if you would use R squar then in both studies uh you would get a positive value and the mean of these R squared would be positive of course as well suggesting that there is on average an effect and then seventh the simplicity of the sampling distribution.

We look for measures that have a normal sampling distribution with um if possible a sampling variance that can be easily estimated.

A remark on the comparability of effect size measures.

I already said that in the same situation for the same types of data you sometimes can calculate multiple measures and sometimes these measures are comparable but sometimes they are not comparable.

For instance, look at um um the standardized mean difference for independent groups and the standardized mean difference uh uh based on gain scores.

So for independent groups, the standardized mean difference is the difference between the two population means divided by the common standard deviation or at least we assume that there is a common population standard deviation.

The G for gain scores is equal to the mean difference score divided by the standard deviation of the different scores.

So it is equal to the mean of the post- test scores minus the mean of the pre-est scores divided by so the standard deviation of the difference scores is equal to the square root of the variance of the post- test scores plus the variance of the pre-est scores minus 2 * the correlation uh between pre and post test um times the standard deviation of the pre-EST scores times the standard deviation of the post- test scores.

If we can assume that the treatment does not have an effect or that that the treatment has the same effect on all persons.

In that situation the variance um um of the post- test scores will be the same as the variance of the post pre-est scores.

So in that situation this variance can be um the variance is equal to sigma squared.

We can put sigma in front of the square root and so we have the difference between the uh the means divided by sigma times the square root of 2 * 1 minus row.

And assuming that the mean of the post- test scores is the same as the mean that would have been observed in a group that was measured only after a treatment.

And assuming that the mean of the pre-est scores is the same as the mean of a control group of control condition in that situation you can use the formula that you see at the bottom of this slide to convert or to express the relationship between the um the effect size for gain scores and the effect size for independent groups.

So why do I why did I explain this derivation?

I explained this derivation to make clear that sometimes we can express the relationship um between two measures and this relationship can be used to convert one measure to the other measure.

But it's also important to see based on this derivation that for deriving this conversion formula we made some assumptions.

We made the assumption that the means of uh the um the the post- test and the pre-est are comparable to the means of uh an experimental uh group and a control group.

And we also made the assumption that the treatment effect is the same for all persons.

So that the variance of the post- test scores is the same as the variance of the pre-est scores.

So based on these assumptions, you can derive this uh conversion formula.

And so if you would uh have an observed effect size um from independent groups and for another study you would have an observed effect size from gain scores where you can convert one observed effect size to the other type of effect size before you combine them in a meta analysis.

Sometimes such a conversion is not pos is not needed.

So for instance, if you look at the observed effect size um the difference between effect sizes sorry the difference between sample means divided by a pulled standard deviation that can be used in the situation where uh the standard deviation of the populations can be assumed to be the same.

But in the same situation, it's also possible to calculate classes delta.

And classes delta estimates exactly the same population value.

Classes delta is the mean is the difference between the sample means divided by the standard deviation of the control group.

So also the standard deviation of the control group is estimating the standard deviation the common standard deviation of the two populations.

So these two effect sizes in fact are estimating the same population effect size.

So they can be combined in the same meta analysis.

You do not have to convert one measure to the other measure.

But what is important here to note is that glasses delta is slightly less precise because you are estimating the common standard deviation sigma by using only the standard deviation of the control group.

So this estimate is less precise and therefore that estimate of the population standard deviation sorry the estimate of the population standardized mean difference is also somewhat uh more uh somewhat less precise.

So this means that standardized mean differences in which the mean uh difference or the difference between the sample means is divided by the bullet standard deviation should be given a somewhat larger weight than classes deltas in a met analysis.

How can you calculate effect sizes?

Well, we have seen that several that that you can derive conversion formulas.

Um, I'm going very fast over the next slides.

So, that were slides that I uh retrieved uh from a website of David Wilson.

So David Wilson said well to calculate an effect size value and here if they talk about if he talks about the effect size value he refers to the standardized mean difference.

So if you would calculate would like to calculate the standardized mean difference then there are several ways or several approaches that can be followed.

Some of these approaches are very good approaches, others are less good and some approaches are poor approaches.

So a great approach is the direct calculation.

So if you would have the sample means and if you would have the standard deviations and the sample sizes, then you can calculate the standardized mean difference using this formula.

We also have seen that there is a clear relationship between the G the standardized mean difference and the t statistic from uh a two sample t test.

Um so you can derive exactly um the standardized mean difference from the t statistic at least if you have um the sample sizes.

Note that if you if an analysis of variance is used uh to compare two groups the f statistic that you obtain is equal to the square of t.

So if you take the square root of f then you get the t value and so again you can derive the standardized mean difference from this f value.

Suppose that you have for a specific study a correlation coefficient, but for other studies you have standardized mean differences.

You can convert the correlation coefficient to that standardized main difference using this formula.

For instance, if you have uh results of an analysis of variance with more than two groups and you have the means of the different categories, but you do not have the standard deviations of each um uh category.

In that situation, you can use you can calculate the standardized mean difference for a pair of means by dividing the difference between the means by a pulled standard deviation um being equal to the square root of the mean squared error that is very often reported uh in such an analysis of variance.

Note that this mean squared error is based on uh the deviations in each of the three groups and not only in these two groups.

So it's not exactly um the value that you would obtain um when calculating a standardized mean difference if you would have the standard deviations of each of the categories separately.

But probably the value you obtain will be very close.

What if you have a twoway factorial ANOVA?

You can see the formula here or if you have anova.

So these were fine or good ways.

Somewhat less good is approximations based on dichoamous data.

Have a formula here.

I'm not going to explain it in detail or this formula to convert a loss ratio to a standardized mean difference or this formula to convert a k square value from a 2x2 contingency table to a standardized mean difference or to convert convert the f coefficient to a standardized mean So to do these calculations you can make use of the website of David Wilson.

Uh I've put the link on this slide.

You can also use um the package ESC from R that is um in in which the same formulas are implemented as in the online tool of David Wilson.

You can also use a metaphor package that we will use later in the practical session.

Other software can be used as well.

For instance, CMA which stands for comprehensive meta analysis or uh you can also use Excel.

But in that case, you will have to yeah to write uh the formulas or implement the formulas yourself.

In the handbook that is online on Toledo, you can also find a lot of formulas that can be used to convert one metric to another metric.

Some threats of effect size measures.

The first threat is of course if you have bad data, if you do not have uh data of a good quality, then of course your effect size metric can also be wrong.

For instance, what is very often the case is that small typing errors are made in data sets and um or also typing errors in research reports um such as in P values or in D values or test statistics or in effect size uh effect sizes that are reported.

So if you use these statistics or draw data to calculate an effect size measure then of course you will get a bad effect size metric if the data you started from were not correct.

Another problem is measurement error.

So suppose your dependent variable in an experimental design is not measured in a very accurate way.

In this situation, the standard deviation that you obtain will be larger.

And so think about the standardized mean difference.

So if the standard deviation will be larger because of measurement error, then the observed effect size will become smaller.

So you can get biased results by having an imprecise measurement of your dependent variable.

By dichotomizing continuous variables, often the effect size becomes smaller.

It's also possible that your variable is not measured that that you are not really measuring exactly what you want to measure.

So that your outcome variable or your independent variable is somewhat biased in the sense that you may that you measure something slightly different.

So this can increase the association between the two variables or it can decrease the association depending on what exactly you are measuring.

It's also possible that there is bias in your estimator.

For instance, I said that the standardized mean difference is more or less unbiased.

So that the mean of the sampling distribution of the standardized mean difference is the population standardized mean difference.

This is not exactly the case.

This is not exactly true.

So Hatches proposed um a correction factor to correct for small sample bias.

So instead of using G, it's better to multiply G by 1 minus 3 / 4 times the sample size - 9.

You can see that if N is large, so if you have a large study, then that correction factor will be more or less equal to one.

So in that situation the correction factor does not correct a lot or or uh the corrected G is almost equal to the original G.

So this correction factor is especially important uh to be used.

It's important to use this correction factor especially if your sample size is small.

Another threat is range restriction.

I'm going to explain this on the next slide.

So more information on these threads is given in the book of Hunan Schmidt.

So they discuss in detail each of these threads and they also discuss in detail how you can correct your effect sizes for these threads.

What about range restriction?

So I have here a scatter plot between two continuous variables.

In fact, these are the scores on two exams from a large group of students.

And it's clear that there is a high correlation between the two variables, a high positive correlation.

So students who performed well on the first exam also performed well on the second exam in general and the other way around.

But suppose that I restrict the range that I only uh keep students who performed between five and 15 on the first exam.

I made a new scatter plot based on only these students.

And if you look at this scatter plot, you can see that the association between the two variables disappeared largely.

So maybe there is still a correlation a positive correlation but this correlation will be very small.

So this is an illustration that the range restriction typically reduces the size of association between two variables.

So again this can induce bias.

======================================================================
Meta Analysis 07 Meta analytic models
======================================================================

In this session, we will look at statistical models that can be used to combine and compare the results of several studies.

More specifically, we will look at how you can investigate and model heterogeneity.

In a typical meta analysis, the following steps can be distinguished.

We formulate our research question.

We plan our study.

We start looking for studies that possibly could be relevant for our meta analysis.

We make a selection of the relevant studies based on inclusion and exclusion criteria.

We start extracting data that are relevant for a met analysis.

This is we look at outcome variables.

We look at the study characteristics that possibly are related to the outcomes and we look at the quality of the studies.

We convert all the data to a common effect size measure and then we combine and compare the effect sizes.

We look for moderator variables and finally we discuss and report the results.

In this session we will look especially to um step seven and eight the combination and comparison of effect sizes and looking for moderator variables.

First the fixed effects model.

In the fixed effects model, we say that an observed effect size and here I use the symbol t to refer to whatever uh type of effect size we have at hand.

So that can be standardized mean differences but that can also be correlation coefficients or loss ratios or any other type of effect size.

So in this model we say well an observed effect size is equal to the population effect size plus a random deviation.

And very often in a meta analysis we use an effect size from which we know that the sampling distribution is a normal distribution.

In other words, in this model R is assumed to follow a normal distribution with mean equal to zero and with a specific variance.

Moreover, for commonly used effect size measures, the sampling variance, so the variance of R is known.

For instance, for the standardized mean difference, we have seen that the sampling variance is more or less equal to 4 divided by n.

So, uh four divided by the total sample size.

So, we can estimate the sampling variance before we start our meta analysis.

So, therefore, sampling variances are assumed or are considered as known in our meta analysis.

So the observed effect size is equal equal to the population effect size plus a random deviation.

We assume that that random deviation is normally distributed with variance equal to uh sigma squar r which is equal to the standard error squared which is equal to the sampling variance.

In a fixed effects model that can be used for meta analysis, we say that if we have a set of observed effect sizes, then we say that each observed effect size is equal to a population effect size plus random deviation.

And moreover, we say that all the population effect sizes for all the studies are exactly the same.

So theta_1 is equal to theta 2 is equal to theta in general.

Therefore this model is also called a fixed effects model.

So we assume that the population effect is the same for all studies.

It's fixed.

It's not random.

So if we have m multiple uh study studies then the effect sizes are assumed to follow a normal distribution around a population effect size theta and this variation is only due to sampling variance because in a specific study we take a sample rather than study the whole population and therefore there is that random uh deviation R.

And so in another study we take another sample and therefore we have another residual R.

And so all these residuals are assumed to follow a normal distribution.

If we would have samples that are infinitely large then these residuals would be equal to zero.

Then our observed effect size is equal to the population effect size.

And because all the population effect sizes are the same for all studies, all observed effect sizes would be exactly the same.

How can we estimate uh the common population effect size?

Well, we can calculate an average of all the observed effect sizes.

So we sum all the observed effect sizes and we divide this sum by the number of effect sizes or the number of studies um g the sampling variance of this uh average effect size is equal to the sampling variance of an individual effect size divided by k.

So what does it mean?

So the more studies we combine, so the more effect sizes we combine, the smaller the sampling variance of the estimate will become.

So the more we are sure that our estimate is close to the population effect size theta.

Of course, even if you use a fixed effects model, uh very often population um studies are not of exactly the same size.

So you may have small studies, you may have larger studies and therefore the sampling variance is probably not the same for all these studies.

For a large study, the sampling variance is small and so we have a small sampling distribution.

For a small study, the sampling variance is large.

So we have a large sampling distribution.

But in a fixed effects model, we assume that all means of these sampling distributions are equal to each other, they're equal to the common population effect size.

So if in such a situation where the sample sizes of the studies can vary, it's not a good idea to use a simple mean, a simple average of the of the observed effect sizes in order to estimate uh the common population effect size.

It's more efficient if we use precision weighted mean.

This is a mean of the observed effect sizes with weights equal to the precision of the observed effect size and the precision of an observed effect size is defined as one over the sampling variance of that uh individual effect size.

So for a small study the sampling variance will be large and therefore the weight so the precision will be small.

So the weight that will be given to that small study will be small.

The sampling variance of this estimate now is equal to one over the sum of the precisions of the individual estimates.

What does this mean?

It means that if we have very precise estimates of the population effect size from our individual studies.

So this is in case we have large individual studies then the precision will be large for these individual studies.

So if we sum all these precisions we will get a large value.

If we take one over the sum of the precisions, we get a small value.

So if you combine the results of very precise estimates, then the sampling variance will become the sampling variance of the average observed effect size will become small. which means that the observed that the mean of the observed effect sizes uh will be a precise estimate of um the common population effect size.

Note also that the more studies we combine, the more terms we add.

So the sum of the precisions will become larger the more effect sizes we have because we sum more precisions and all these precisions are positive.

So the more studies the more effect sizes we combine the larger the sum of the precisions and therefore one over the sum of the precisions will become smaller and so the sampling variance of our new estimate will become smaller.

So we will get a more precise estimate of the population effect.

The more studies we combine and the more precise each of these individual studies are, it can be shown that the sampling variance of our estimate is indeed smallest if we combine the observed effect sizes by using a precision weighted mean.

If the observed effect sizes follow a normal distribution with mean the population effect size and with a specific variance then the mean of the observed effect sizes will also follow a normal distribution with the same mean so with the same uh population effect size as the mean and with a variance which is equal to uh one over the sum of the precisions.

So therefore a standardized estimate will follow a standard normal distribution.

And why is this interesting?

Well, we can use it in two ways.

First to test a null hypothesis.

Suppose that you your null hypothesis is that theta so the population effect size is equal to a specific value theta 0.

In that case if that would be true.

So under the assumption that the null hypothesis is true.

This would mean that the estimate minus the theta under the null hypothesis divided by the sampling uh by the standard deviation of the sampling distribution follows a standard normal distribution.

Note that theta 0 is defined or is um specified under the null hypothesis.

And we also know the standard deviation of our estimate.

The standard deviation of our estimate is the square root of one over the sum of the precisions of the individual effect sizes.

And we know how precise each of the individual effect sizes are.

For instance, for the standardized mean difference, the precision of one standardized mean difference is one over the sampling variance.

It's 1 over 4 / n.

So it's n / 4.

So we know in advance what the precision is of individual effect sizes and therefore we can also derive what the precision is of um our mean estimate.

And so we can calculate that test statistic.

If our test statistic um has a very large value or a very small value then we will reject the null hypothesis that theta is equal to theta 0.

We can also use the fact that uh our standardized um estimate follows a normal distribution or a standard normal distribution, we can also use this property or this feature to construct a 95% confidence interval.

So if we take our estimate and we subtract and we add 1.96 times the standard deviation of the sampling distribution then we obtain the under and upper limit of a 95% confidence interval assessing heterogeneity.

We discussed a fixed effects model. fixed effects model that assumes that the population effect size is the same for all studies so that we have one common theta.

If this is not the case then the way we estimated that theta and the way we test that theta is not valid and very often that assumption is a very strong assumption which probably is violated often in practice.

For instance, there can be a lot of differences between studies.

For instance, in the kind of participants in study context in the outcome variable and how the outcome variable is measured in the independent variable or the treatment and how this treatment is operationalized in the study design and so on.

So there can be many differences differences between studies and it's unlikely that none of these differences so none of these stud characteristics affect the size of the population effect.

So therefore using a fixed effects model may not be a good idea.

You can say well maybe sometimes it is not as uh such a bad idea to assume that the population effect size is the same in all studies but look for instance at the many labs projects.

So in this projects the idea was let's try to replicate um some studies in several laboratories around the world.

So different research groups are trying to replicate exactly the findings that were found in in specific studies.

And it was found that in in many of these replications, the effect sizes that were found were not the same.

But not only not the same, there were varying more than you would expect based on samp sampling variance alone.

So we cannot explain the variation in effect sizes that was found um over all these research groups by thinking about sampling variance alone.

Probably there were systematic differences between these studies.

So even if you try to replicate perfectly studies then still it seems that there still are some small uh systematic differences between studies that affect um the effect that is studied.

So maybe the use of a fixed effects model is not very often or maybe hardly maybe never a good idea.

But how can you know whether the assumption that the population effect size is the same for all studies?

How can you know this assumption makes sense?

Well, one possibility is to do a homogeneity test.

The null hypothesis is that all population effect sizes are exactly the same.

The alternative hypothesis is not that all population effect sizes are different, but the alternative hypothesis is that they're not all the same.

So it could mean that at least that that one uh population effect size differs from the others.

But it's also possible that two differ from each other or defer from the others or they're very um there are many uh alternative scenarios.

But in general the alternative hypothesis says they're not all the same.

So at least one effect size differs from uh another.

How can we test this assumption of homogeneity?

Well, we can use the Q statistic.

And if you look at the Q statistic, then you see that it is a kind it looks like a kind of variance.

So you look at a deviation between observed effect sizes and the mean effect size.

And these deviations of course these can be positive these can be negative but you square these deviations so that all deviations become positive.

Then you sum these squared deviations and note that you also weight the squared deviations.

So you will especially look at um studies from uh effect sizes from large studies.

So if for a large study there is a deviation of the observed effect size from the population effect size, well this deviation will count much more than the deviation for a small study.

And so by summing all these weighted square deviations, you get of course a positive value.

And the more variation there is in observed effect sizes, the larger that Q statistic.

It can be shown that under the null hypothesis that all population effect sizes are the same, the Q statistic will follow a k square distribution.

A k square distribution with k minus one degrees of freedom.

Note that k refers here to the number of studies or the number of effect sizes. we will reject the null hypothesis if we obtain a very large Q statistic.

So if our Q statistic is really in the right tail of that K square distribution.

So for instance in the 5% largest uh or more extreme values of that k square distribution So we have seen that often a fixed effects model is or using a fixed effects model is not a good idea because very often the assumption that population effect sizes are the same is likely to be violated.

You can test whether this uh assumption is violated but yeah a problem with that homogeneity test is that the power is not very high.

So it is possible that you do not reject the null hypothesis that all population effect sizes are the same but still that there are differences between population effect sizes.

So in that case it's it's still not a good idea to use a fixed effects model although the null hypothesis that population effect sizes are the same is not rejected.

Maybe it's a better idea to say from the beginning that maybe population effect sizes can vary over studies.

This is what is done is in a random effects model.

The observed effect size TJ is assumed to be equal to the population effect size for that study J plus a random deviation.

And again the random deviation RJ is assumed to follow a a normal distribution and for most common effect sizes uh like standardized mean differences locals ratios and so on we can already estimate the variance of R.

But now there is a second equation.

A second equation that says the population effect size in study J is assumed to be equal to a mean effect size theta plus a random deviation that is typical for that study that is specific for that study.

So the UJ so the UJ is a difference or the deviation of the population effect size in study J from the mean effect size over all studies and also this residual UJ is assumed to follow a normal distribution.

So in this model we assume that each uh study can have its own population effect size.

Of course it's possible that in some of the studies population effect size is exactly the same.

And moreover we assume that these population effect sizes follow a normal distribution.

So a normal distribution with mean equal to theta and with variance equal to the variance of u.

Of course this does not mean that um in a specific study the observed effect size is equal to the population effect size.

So on top of the variation between population effect sizes, we have also variation of observed effect sizes around population effect sizes.

So for instance, in study five, the mean or the population effect size is equal to theta 5, but the observed effect size T5 can be somewhat smaller or somewhat larger than theta 5. comparing the fixed effects model and the random effects model.

So here you can see again the fixed effects model.

The observed effect size is equal to a common population effect size plus random deviation due to the fact that within that study only a sample is taken.

In the random effects model, we say the observed effect size is equal to a population effect size that is typical to that study J plus a random deviation due to sampling variance.

And the population effect size of that study is equal to a mean population effect size plus a deviation specific for that study.

Or we can write the two equations in one equation.

So the observed effect size in study J is equal to an overall mean effect size over all studies plus the deviation of the population effect size from study J from the mean population effect size and plus a random deviation of the observed effect size from the population effect size from that study J.

So note that in two in the two models so both in the fixed effects model and random effects model we have uh our theta but the theta now has a different interpretation in both models.

In a fixed effects model, the theta refers to the overall no sorry to the common population effect size common population effect size for all studies.

Whereas in the random effects model, the theta refers to the mean population effect size.

So the mean of that normal distribution of population effect sizes.

Note that in a fixed effects model, there is only one parameter to be estimated, more specifically theta.

We want to estimate the common population effect size.

We do not have to estimate the variance of R because we already know this variance before we start our meta analysis.

Again for uh an observed uh standardized mean difference the sampling variance is about 4 divided by n.

So we do not have to estimate this parameter.

It's not an unknown parameter.

In the random effects model there are two unknown parameters.

We have to estimate the mean population effect size theta.

But on top of that we also will estimate the variance between studies in the population effect sizes.

So we also want to estimate the variance of the use.

Again the variance in the Rs uh does not have to be estimated anymore.

We already know them before starting our meta analysis.

Meta analysis sometimes has been have been criticized because and especially random effects model uh meta analysis because you are estimating a mean uh a mean effect the mean population effect sizes overall population effect sizes.

And the idea is well if the population effect size can vary over studies because studies differ in a lot of aspects.

So does it make sense to combine all these effect sizes?

Are we not mixing apples and oranges?

And I think the answer of Jean Claus who started um or who invented um the idea of meta analysis the answer of Jean Claus was well it's not interesting uh to combine apples with apples or oranges with oranges.

It's much more interesting to combine apples and oranges because in that way you can compare apples and oranges.

So to explain this somewhat further, the advantage of combining the results of studies that are not done in exactly the same way and for which the population effect sizes may be not exactly the same.

Well, what is interesting about such meta analysis is that we can test whether there is hetrogenity, whether there is homogeneity and suppose that we see that population effect sizes are very similar despite the fact that um uh that the studies were set up in in various ways or that the treatments were done operationalized in different ways or that population studied were not exactly the same in all studies.

So despite these differences between studies, if despite these differences between studies, we still find the same population effect then this is an interesting finding then this means that we can generalize this effect to a variety of situations.

If on the contrary we find that there is heterogeneity so that population effect sizes are not the same.

Well then an an additional interesting question is why are there differences?

Can we study in what situations for what types of studies the effect is larger than for what other types of studies.

So in this way we can study much more questions and can be answered by individual studies.

So for instance, we can study whether the effect is larger in the United States compared to Europe and so on.

An additional advantage of combining the results of studies even if these studies um do not exactly do exactly the same things is that in this way we can increase the size of our metalic data set.

And so by increasing the size of our metal analytic data set, so by increasing the number of effect sizes in our meta analysis, we can increase the accuracy or we can increase the precision of our mean estimate and at the same time we can increase the statistical power in doing statistical tests.

So there are several advantages of uh combining even heterogeneous study results.

Of course, it does not make sense to combine whatever numbers.

So if you want to combine the results of several studies, you have to look at or you have to evaluate whether there is a common ground in these studies.

Do these studies uh study more or less the same research question?

So to give an example of a of meta analysis that was done by glass.

So class did a huge meta analysis uh studying the effect of psychological treatments but there are different types of psychological treatments.

And so he has been criticized because he was combining effects of a variety of types of psychological treatments.

And based on the meta analysis, he was saying something about the average effect of a psychological treatment.

But people were saying, well, there is not such a typical psychological treatment.

So what is the meaning of this mean population effect size for psychological treatments?

But what was interesting in the meta analysis of of class is that in this way he could compare different types of treatments.

He could study whether for instance psychotherapy gave better or worse results compared to um client center therapy and so on comparing the fixed effects model and random effects model.

So in a random effects model, if we want to estimate um uh the mean population effect size using the results of several studies, so using multiple observed effect sizes, we can again calculate uh a mean of these observed effect sizes uh precision weighted mean.

So you can see that formula here is exactly the same as for the fixed effects model.

But there is a difference.

The difference is that the precision is now different.

Precision is one over the variance of the observed effect size.

But the difference is in a fixed effects model the variance of observed effect sizes is simply the sampling variance.

So it's the variance of the R.

Whereas in a random effects model we say no there are two residuals there are two deviations two types of deviations.

An observed effect size can be smaller than other observed effect sizes because by coincidence we have taken a sample and in that sample the observed effect size is smaller than the population effect size.

But it's also possible that the population effect size in that study was smaller than the population effect size than the mean population effect size.

So in fact the variation in observed effect sizes is now due to these two sources of uh deviations.

So it's equal to the sampling variance plus the variance in the use and in the metalic literature.

Very often the symbol toao squared is used to refer to this variance in population effect sizes.

What is a consequence for a mean effect?

Well, it can go in a two directions.

So in general, the fixed effects model and the random effects model estimate of theta is somewhat similar.

But if you look at the weights that are given, the weights in the random effects model will be more similar to each other.

So the weights are equal to one over the precision and the precision depends in a random effects model both on the to squared which is the same for all studies and on the sampling variance which is different for different studies.

In a fixed effects model, um the precision only depends on the sampling variance which is different for each study.

So in a fixed effects model, the weights can differ a lot over studies.

In the random effects model, the rates are more similar.

And I think this makes sense.

This makes sense in because in if we uh assume that population effect sizes may not be exactly the same in all studies.

So that there is a distribution of population effect sizes and we want to say something about the mean of that distribution.

We are going to give enough weight also to smaller studies.

Okay.

In smaller studies there is a lot of sampling variance.

So we we give less weight to that study compared to a large study.

But still we want to give enough weight to that effect size from that study because in that study an other population effect size is estimated compared to other studies and therefore we also want to give enough weight to that individual study.

What about the precision?

So again the precision of our estimate when using a random effects model is equal to one over the sampling variance.

So it's equal to the sum of the precisions of um all observed effect sizes.

So it's again exactly the same formula as for a fixed effects model but again the difference is in that variance of t.

In fixed effects model, it's the s the sampling variance only.

In the random effects model, this variance of t is equal to the sum of two uh types of variance sampling variance and the uh the true variance or the variance in population effect sizes to squar.

So this means that in a random effects model, the precision of an individual effect size of an individual observed effect size is smaller and therefore the precision of our weight of sorry the precision of our mean is also smaller.

And again I think this makes sense.

Um now we take into account the additional uncertainty.

We say well each study has its own population effect size and we want to say something about the mean of the population of effect sizes but we only have a sample of studies.

And so if we had observed an effect size in an additional study, maybe in that additional study another population effect size would have been estimated.

And so because now we have an additional uncertainty because we do not have information on many possible um yeah about many population effect sizes of studies that could have been performed. an example.

So here we can see the results of a small meta analysis done by uh Borenstein HS and Rostein.

So a meta analysis of about uh six studies look at the mean effect size.

The mean effect size is equal to 0.397.

Standard error is equal to 0062 when using a fixed effects model.

Also look at the size of the dots in the confidence intervals.

The size of the dots is pre uh proportional to the weight that is given to that effect size.

So you can see that the study of dunuts so the fourth study has a very large dot.

This means that a lot of weight is given to that individual study probably because this is a large study.

So the sample size is large.

Therefore you can also see that the confidence interval is uh smaller.

So it's a more precise estimate and so more weight is given to that study.

Now look at the results of the random effects model.

You can see that the mean effect now is so much similar but standard error is much larger.

It used to be 0 062.

Now it's 0 107.

So it's almost twice as large.

So the standard error is larger.

So the the sampling variance is larger.

The precision is smaller.

The confidence interval is also larger.

So this indicates that we take into account the additional uncertainty.

Also look at the size of the dots.

Before the study of donut had a much larger dot than the other studies.

Whereas now this dot is still somewhat larger than for the other studies.

But the size of the dots are uh more similar.

This is because we are using more similar weights in our random effects model because in our weights we also take into account the to squared and the to squar is the same for all studies.

So it's a constant.

How can we test and uh and calculate interval estimates for theta?

Well, again the same slide as before.

The only difference now is that the standard deviation of theta hat.

So the standard the sample yeah the standard deviation of the sampling distribution of our estimate of the mean population effect size now is the sum or is equal to the square root of the sum of two variances rather than the square root of one uh variance.

So I said the precision or the accuracy is smaller when using a random effects model.

So our confidence interval will be larger.

It also means that the power is smaller.

If our confidence is larger then the probability that for instance a value of zero is included in a confidence interval will be larger.

So the probability that we will reject the null hypothesis that an effect is equal to zero will become smaller.

So when we use a random effects model the power is smaller and we have a smaller accuracy.

You may wonder this is not what we want.

So why not using a fixed effects model?

So the reason is simple.

The fixed effects model is only appropriate if population effect sizes are exactly the same.

So if population effect sizes are not the same in all studies then the results of the fixed effects model is simply wrong are simply wrong.

And so indeed we have more power and the confidence interval indeed are smaller when using a fixed effects model.

But this is because we do not take into account the additional uncertainty we have about the mean effect size when population effect sizes are not exactly the same.

So the power and the accuracy is artificially higher when using a fixed effects model.

The next question is well we have seen in our weights we have to use to squar um we have to use to squar as well to calculate the precision of our estimate and so to do significance tests and to calculate confidence intervals.

But how can you obtain to squar before we do the meta analysis?

We can already estimate or calculate the sampling variance but to squar cannot be calculated before our meta analysis.

We have to estimate this in our meta analysis.

And how can we estimate to squ?

Because in the random effects model we have seen the observed effect size in study J is equal to a mean population effect size plus a residual and plus another residual.

So we have two residuals.

For each observed effect size we have two residuals.

So how can we disentangle these two sources of variance?

Well, the reason is simple because we already know the variance of R.

So the variance in the observed effect sizes is the sum of the variance of U.

So to squar plus the sampling variance because we know the sampling variance.

So we know the variance of R. we can calculate and then we also see how much variation there is in the observed effect sizes.

We can um subtract um the variance in observed we can take the variance in the observed effect sizes and subtract the sampling variance to get an uh an estimate of the variance of the use or to squared.

Of course, the sampling variance or the variance of R is not the same for all studies.

So for larger studies, the sampling variance will be smaller than for smaller studies.

So a solution could be that we can that we calculate the mean of these sampling variances.

So we sum we sum all the sampling variances and we divide it by the number of studies.

So this is what was proposed by hatches and 1985.

So the estimate of to squar is the variance in or the observed variance in the observed effect sizes minus the mean estimated sampling variance.

Note that sometimes a conditional random effects model approach is used which means well one starts from a fixed effects model one performs a homogeneity test and if the homogeneity test shows that the null hypothesis of homogeneity can be rejected.

So if there is evidence for heterogeneity then one says okay fix using a fixed effects model was not a good idea let's continue with a random effects model.

I want to mention very clearly that this conditional random effects model is not a good approach.

The problem is that the power of the homogeneity test is not very good.

So it is possible that the assumption that all population effect sizes are the same that this assumption is simply wrong.

But still that this assumption is not rejected in our homogeneity test.

And in that case in a conditional random effects model approach one would continue using a fixed effects model whereas a random effects model would be more appropriate.

So my suggestion is to use always random effects model.

So a random effects model does not assume that uh population effect sizes are the same for all studies.

But it is allowed that population effect sizes are the same for all studies.

In that situation the variance that we estimate the variance in population effect sizes will be probably um very small.

So our estimate of the variance between population effect sizes.

So the variance of u so the to squar probably will be very small or even equal to zero.

There is still some discussion about whether it is a good idea to use a random effects model.

So a first issue is yeah does it make sense to consider our sample of studies or the sample of effect sizes as a random sample of a population of effect sizes.

So our thetas from our set of studies, we consider these thetas as a random sample from that normal distribution of thetas.

But does it make sense to consider studies as a random sample?

Another issue is well are we interested in that population of population effect sizes?

Maybe we are only interested in these specific treatments that were studied in the studies we have.

So maybe we do not want to generalize to other population effect sizes than the population effect sizes that were studied in our set of studies.

Another question is does it make sense to assume that population effect sizes are normally distributed?

Maybe this does not make sense.

Of course, we can test whether these effect sizes are normally distributed.

But the problem is very often in a meta analysis we do not have a lot of effect sizes.

We do not have a lot of studies.

Say um suppose that we only have 10 or 20 or even 30 studies.

That's not enough to test with enough power the null hypothesis that our uh effect sizes stem from a normal distribution.

And then a final issue is if we use random effects model then we are giving more or less the same weight to all studies.

So we give uh relatively a lot of weight to small studies as well.

In a fixed effects model we give we do not give a lot of weight to small studies.

And we have seen in the first session that publication bias is especially apparent for small studies.

In small studies, there is a lot of variation in effect sizes.

So probably only the largest effect sizes for small studies will be published or reported because only the largest effect sizes will be statistically significant.

So therefore the problem of publication bias will be will have a larger effect on the results of a meta analysis if we are giving uh relatively large weights to the small studies which is done in the random effects model.

In a fixed effects model small studies are downweighted much more.

So for if there is publication bias, this will most be most apparent when using a random effects model, which is another argument against the use of random effects model.

So there are still some questions that are asked um or still some critiques that are given on the use of random effects model.

So suppose that you find that there is indeed heterogeneity that population effect sizes are not the same for all studies.

Of course this is not a very interesting finding.

It's or or it raises another question.

Why is there variation between studies?

Can we explain why in some studies the effect size is larger than in other studies?

And one possibility is to uh use a model with a categorical um predictor, a categorical variable, a categorical study characteristic.

So that's a characteristic that divides studies in categories.

For instance, maybe you say or you think that there can be differences in the effects um of studies done in the United States uh compared to um effects of studies done in Europe.

So then we have two categories of studies and in the simplest model we say well within these categories population effect sizes are the same but it is possible that population effect sizes differ over categories.

Of course this does not mean that within categories observed effect sizes will be exactly the same because again you have that sampling variance.

So a population effect size or an observed effect size in a specific study can still be somewhat smaller or somewhat larger than the population effect size from that study.

But in this model, from study J in category I is equal to the population effect size for that category I plus random deviation.

Random deviation due to sampling variance and again sampling variance can be estimated.

So what uh population parameters we have to estimate here are the population effect sizes for all these categories.

So the theta I look at the Q statistic that we have seen before. we can calculate exactly the same Q statistic but now I used uh two summation marks because yeah we have um effect sizes from multiple studies from multiple categories.

What we can do is so I said before the Q can be considered as a kind of variance or a statistic that expresses how much variation there is um of the observed effect sizes around the overall mean effect size.

We can do a kind of analysis of variance by splitting this total variability in observed effect sizes in two parts.

We can say well observed effect sizes can vary around the overall mean because of two um there are two explanations or there can be two explanations.

The first explanation is that there are differences between the population means of different categories and a second explanation is well within categories the observed effect sizes can vary.

So we can split um the the Q statistic that we have seen before in two separate Q statistics and I will give uh the formulas in on the next slide but note that we that each of these Q statistics follow a kiquare distribution.

So the Q total is in fact um if we use this Q total and compare this Q statistic to a K square distribution then we are performing a homogeneated test the same test as the one that we have done before.

The Q between tests whether there is variability between categories.

So it's a kind of moderator test.

So it tests whether the size of the effect depends on the category.

If the size of the effect depends on the category, then the category or the categorical variable is called a moderator variable.

The category moderates the effect of the intervention.

Within categories, there still can be variability.

So it's again a kind of homogeneity test but it's testing the homogeneity within categories.

So because now we are splitting the total variance in two parts.

Um this is a kind of analysis of variance.

But note a difference with an ordinary analysis of variance is that now we are going to give weights.

We are going to look especially um at larger studies. they are going to give more weight to larger studies.

So this is a weighted analysis.

How does the formulas look like?

Well, Q total, we have already seen this Q total.

This Q total is split in two Q's.

The Q between expresses the size of variation between category uh population effect sizes or category means.

So we look at the mean population effect size estimate within each category I and we calculate the deviation with the overall estimate or the overall mean estimate.

We square this um deviation.

We wait this deviation this squared deviation and we sum this overall categories.

Note that the weight that is given to each category is equal to the sum of the weights um of all these studies within that category.

The Q within is calculated by calculating the Q within for each category separately and then summing all these Q withins.

And how is the Q within for a specific category I calculated?

Well, we look at the squared deviations of the observed effect sizes from the mean effect size from this category.

We multiply it by the weight um and we sum everything um overall observed effect sizes within that category.

Note that if we found that the categorical variable has a moderating effect so that there are differences between categories of studies then uh an interesting question is between which two or between what pairs of categories there are differences.

I'm not going to discuss this but you can look at the paper of hatches and pickot um to look at um how you can test contrasts in much the same way as in ordinary analysis of variance you can calculate or test contrasts between pairs of categories an example let's go back to the example of Steve Stefan Renbush about the teacher expectancy effects So we have our 19 observed effect sizes together with their standard error.

So the square of the sampling variances and we have different categories of studies.

In some studies there was no prior contact between uh students and teachers.

In other studies there was one week of prior contact other studies two weeks or in still other studies three or more than three weeks.

I've done a met meta analysis using a fixed effects model and using a random effects model.

So on the right side of this graph you can see the results of the fixed effects model and the random effects model analysis.

Note that the estimate of theta is somewhat similar for the two approaches.

But for the random effects model, the confidence interval is much larger than for the fixed effects model because now we take into account that there may be systematic variation between studies.

So there may be variation between population effect sizes.

Here I ordered the effect sizes according to the number of weeks of prior contact.

And what is interesting is that in the first category, the first category of studies in which there was no prior contact, observed effect sizes were relatively large.

If there was one week of prior contact, on average, effect sizes were somewhat smaller.

After two weeks of prior contact, effect sizes were still smaller and after three weeks of prior contact, effect sizes were around zero or even on average somewhat negative.

So apparently um there are differences between these categories of studies.

So we can use a weighted analysis of variance to test whether these differences that we see here are statistically significant. here the results.

So if we use uh the overall Q or the total Q statistic so to test whether in general there is homogeneity we see that this null hypothesis is rejected.

So we have a Q statistic equal to 35.83 with 18 degrees of freedom.

This gives us a p value that is smaller than 0.05 even smaller than 0.01.

So we can reject the null hypothesis that all population effect sizes are the same.

The second test, the Q between test tests whether there are differences between categories.

Again you can see that we obtain a very small p value.

So again we reject the null hypothesis and we conclude yes there are differences between categories of studies.

And then the third test using the Q within statistic does not give a small p value.

On the contrary, the p value is relatively large.

It's equal to 42.

So we do not reject the null hypothesis.

The null hypothesis stating that all population effect sizes within categories are the same.

So we conclude yes there are differences between population effect sizes but these differences can be explained completely by the number of weeks of prior contact.

If we take into account that categorical variable there is no heterogenity anymore.

So the Q within test shows that the variation we still see within categories can be explained completely by random variation.

So by sampling variance maybe you can have a look at the Excel sheet that is on to called routenbush example.

In this Excel sheet I did all these calculations.

So I used uh fixed effects model to estimate and to test uh the theta so the common population effect size.

I also used random effects model to test and to estimate the mean population effect size.

I also used a Q uh statistic and I also performed a weighted analysis of variance.

So the calculations that were done to obtain Q total, Q between and Q within are shown in that Excel sheet.

So I recommend you to have a look at this Excel sheet and to try to understand how these results were obtained.

A note um simulation studies have shown that maybe the Q statistic is not the best statistic to use.

The Hartung test um brings better under control the type one erate.

Another approach to take into account differences between studies is by using not a weighted analysis of variance but a weighted regression analysis.

So the idea now is the observed effect size in study J is equal to the population effect size in study J plus a residual due to sampling variance.

But the the population effect sizes of the studies now are described using a regression equation.

So it's equal to the population effect size in study J is equal to a constant an intercept plus a regression weight times um yeah the value on a specific stat characteristic for this study and so on.

Note that in this regression equation there is no residual.

So we assume that based on this regression equation we can perfectly describe what the population effect size is in a specific study.

So there is no random variation.

It's completely fixed. is completely the population effect size is completely determined by the characteristics of the study.

So therefore we still talk about the fixed effects model but it's a fixed effects model including uh moderator variables in regression model.

So it's called fixed effects regression model.

Note that this is not an ordinary regression analysis.

It's a weighted regression analysis.

Again, we are going to give um or we are going to use the precision as weights and like in an ordinary regression analysis.

Um you get the estimates of uh the regression weights, you get estimates of um the standard errors of these uh estimates.

And so the estimates divided by the standard errors follow a normal distribution or standard normal distribution.

So if um the estimates are at least twice as large as a standard error, we know that we can reject another hypothesis at the 5% significance level.

So we have seen random effects models.

We also have seen how if there is variation in population effect sizes, how we can include moderators, how we can include a categorical moderator and perform an analysis of variance or how we can include um a moderator in a regression model.

But in both models that we have seen there was no residual no residual U.

So which means that we assumed in that analysis of variance that there may be differences between categories of studies but within categories population effect sizes are the same.

We can also define a model where we say well maybe there are specific population effect size or mean effect sizes for each category.

But on top of that maybe a population effect size of a study can defer from the mean in the category to which that population effect size belongs.

So we can include an additional uh residual u.

So here we combine effects the random effects model and uh the fixed effects model with a categorical moderator variable.

Also the regression model can be extended by including an additional residual U to say that maybe we can based on the characteristics of the study we can predict the population effect size from that study but maybe the population effect size from that study still differs from what we predicted.

So that's the meaning of that residual U.

And so in uh analysis in meta analysis using these models we are going to estimate well in the first model we are going to estimate the theta I so the mean effects for the different categories but on top of that we are going to estimate the variance of the use.

So the variance between studies within categories in a regression model we are going to estimate the regression coefficients.

So the betas and uh as well as the variance in the use.

So which is the variance between population effect sizes after taking into account um the effects of the study characteristics to illustrate the random effects model with a moderator um using that uh analysis of variance model.

So here we assume that we have multiple categories.

Here we have for instance two categories.

But within these categories population effect sizes can still vary and we assume that this variation is according to a normal distribution.

Of course on top of that variation um so yeah we we have to we still have the sampling variation.

So now we have three sources of variation.

We have variation between categories in the population in the mean population effect sizes.

We have variation within categories um between population effect sizes.

And on top of that we have the sampling variation the variation of observed effect sizes around the population effect sizes.

So because in this model we have a combination of random variation and fixed variation or variation that can be predicted uh using our moderator variables.

We also call this mix of random and and fixed effects.

We call it a mixed effects model.

Note that this model is the least restrictive model.

It's a more general model.

Um, if you use this model and it turns out that the variance of U is equal to zero, then this model automatically simplifies to a fixed effects model with a moderator.

Or suppose that the moderator variable is not having an effect.

In that situation, the the mixed effects model um reduces or simplifies to random effects model or if there is no effect of the moderator.

And if there is also no random variation in population effect sizes, then the mixed effects model automatically simplifies to the first model we started from.

The fixed effects model without moderators.

So a final remark I want to make about these analysis of variance models is that very often it is assumed that within categories the between study variance so the variance of u is exactly the same.

So we are going to estimate only one parameter the variance of u or the to squared.

But some software um packages also allow to assume that possibly the variance of u depends on the category.

In that situation of course you estimate much more variance components.

For instance, in the software Refman or in um this is done uh by default in the software CMA, you have the choice.

A simulation study showed that if in reality all variances between population effect sizes are the same for all categories, then it's a better idea to uh yeah to ask only or to use only one estimate of this common uh between study variance.

So it's a good idea to use a pulled estimate over categories.

If not, it's better to obtain or to ask um uh for yeah for a separate uh variance estimates one for each category otherwise you will get flawed results.

So to summarize this session we have seen six types of models.

We started from a fixed effects model without moderator.

Then we looked at random effects model without moderators.

We said well if there is random variation maybe it's a good idea to include a moderator and we have seen um how we can extend the fixed effects model as well as the random effects model by including a a categorical moderator.

So resulting in analysis of variance models or including continuous moderators resulting in fixed effects or random effects regression models.

======================================================================
Meta Analysis 08 Assessing the credibility of the meta analytic results
======================================================================

After performing your meta analysis, it's important that you look critically at the value of your analysis and that you are very transparent about the quality of the results.

In this screencast, we will look at three aspects.

First, the assessment and correction of publication bias.

Second, checks of potential outliers and their impact.

And third, checks of the assumptions that are made during the analysis.

First, publication bias.

We have already discussed where publication bias can come from.

In many fields, the probability that a finding is reported and published is higher when the finding is statistically significant.

Therefore, one way to detect publication bias is to compare the overall effect size for published and unpublished results.

You could, for instance, do a moderator analysis with the publication status as a dummy moderator.

If the regression weights of this moderator variable is statistically significant, this is an indication that there is publication bias.

Possible issue is is the statistical power because it may be hard to find sufficient unpublished studies to do this moderator analysis.

An alternative approach is to make use of plots.

A funnel plot is a scatter plot which on the with on the x-axis the observed effect size and on the y-axis the sample size.

You would expect a pattern like this one.

We have seen that observed effect sizes vary around the true effect size.

But for large studies the sampling variance is smaller and for than for small studies.

This is exactly why you see what you see in this scatter plot at the top.

So for large studies the observed effect sizes do not vary a lot.

Whereas at the bottom for small studies there is much more variation.

In this way you get a pattern of an inverse funnel.

Hence the name funnel plot.

In this example the population effect size is probably somewhere around 0.10.

But look at the funnel plot that I made for the bush met analysis on the teacher expectancy effect.

You can see that the pattern is not a symmetric triangle anymore.

In the left corner, there are no dots.

Maybe there were some small studies that found a very negative observed effect size, but a negative effect size is not what we would expect here because a negative effect size would mean that teachers are giving higher grades to the so-called weak students.

It's therefore possible that researchers, reviewers, or journal editors were surprised by the negative effect size and attributed this unexpected result to coincidence because of the small sample size and therefore decided not to report or publish the findings.

In the right corner, on the contrary, you can see multiple dots.

It is possible that exactly because of the small sample size in some studies researchers obtained by coincidence a very large observed effect size.

Maybe researchers and reviewers were enthusiastic that they found such a spectacular effect size that may even be statistically significant despite a small sample size and therefore reported and published these study results.

Note that in this way publication bias leads to a negative correlation between the sample size and the observed effect size.

In general, the larger the studies, the smaller on average the observed effect size.

An alternative plot is a contour enhanced funnel plot.

Again on the x-axis you have the observed effect size and on the y-axis the standard error with a smallest value on the top.

First look at the dots.

You can see that the pattern is not symmetric which is an indication of publication bias.

Now look at the triangles.

In contrast to an ordinary funnel plot, this time the middle of the triangle is not the average effect size, but rather zero.

With different colors, the areas are indicating what would lead to statistically significant results.

Here the white area refers to observed effect sizes that are statistically not significant.

The light gray area refers to values that would give a p value smaller than 0.05.

Dark gray smaller than 0.01.

And outside the dark gray area, P values smaller than uh 0.001.

What you can see is that in this extreme example, the data set includes only observed effect sizes that were statistically significant, mainly with P values smaller than 0.01.

The asymmetry is clearly related to the size of the p value.

A similar plot is a radial plot or a gold braid plot which is illustrated here for the round bush data on the teacher expectancy effects.

A scatter plot is made with the effect size divided by the standard error on the yaxis and one over the standard error on the x-axis.

An unweighted regression analysis is done with the intercept constraint to zero.

The slope now can be interpreted as the overall effect which is indicated on the arc with a confidence interval.

If there is no publication bias, the dots are supposed to be symmetrically distributed around the regression line.

Here we see that on the left side so for the smaller studies the dots are typically above the regression line which is an indication of publication bias.

Note that in addition confidence interval lines are drawn.

It can be expected that 95% of the Z values are within these intervals.

The plot therefore can also be used to detect outliers.

We have seen that publication bias may lead to a negative association between the observed effect sizes and sample sizes.

Therefore, another way to assess publication bias and to test for publication bias is to estimate and test a measure of association between effect sizes and the size of the study.

Measures that are often used are Kendall tow or Spearmman's rank correlation.

Still another approach is to include the standard error as a predictor in the model.

In other words, to study the moderating effect of the standard error.

An important remark, however, is that a negative correlation does not necessarily mean that there is publication bias.

Of course, it's possible that by coincidence you will find the correlation between observed effect sizes and sample sizes.

But measures and tests for association also often ignore completely the between study heterogeneity and therefore ignores a source of variation or uncertainty about the effect sizes resulting in an inflated type one error rate.

Moreover, it's possible that in small studies the treatment is longer, more intensive or more personalized exactly because this is more feasible if the number of participants is limited.

And this may be the reason for finding larger effect sizes in smaller studies.

For instance, typically much larger effect sizes are found in single case experimental studies compared to group comparison studies.

In some a negative correlation or an asymmetric funnel plot may be an indication of publication bias, but definitely not a proof.

Note that for some effect sizes such as a standardized mean difference G, the sampling variance depends on the size of the effect and hence you can expect a correlation between the standard error and the observed effect size even without publication bias.

Hisan described the variance stabilizing transformation of G which makes that the sampling variance of the resulting effect sizes does not depend on the size of the effect sizes anymore.

Using the transformed effect sizes improves the results of Edgar's regression test.

Similarly, transforming correlations to Fisher Z values makes that the sampling variance depends on the sample size only, not on the size of the effect size anymore.

There are also several approaches to correct for publication bias.

The first approach is a trim and fill method.

Here we see another funnel plot.

There is some asymmetry which may be due to publication bias.

On your right side, you see some observed effect sizes that are relatively large.

Especially the observed effect size of plus 4.5 is striking.

On the left side, there seems to be a gap because without publication bias, we would expect a symmetric funnel.

In the first step, we will drop some dots in order to make the funnel symmetric.

In the trim and fill method, this is done in an iterative way.

If asymmetry is found, the most extreme dot is removed and the symmetry is tested again.

This continues until there is no significant asymmetry anymore.

This is the trimming phase.

At the end of this phase, the overall effect size is estimated again, an estimate that is supposed to be unbiased.

In the second step, the filling phase, the dots that were dropped are reinserted again.

But for each dot that is reinserted at the right side, a dot at the left side is added as well.

A dot that deviates to the same extent from the new overall effect size estimate.

The idea is that the dots that are added on the left side could have been the results of studies that were not reported or published because these effects were unexpected and statistically not significant.

Here you see the results.

The black dots are the dots that are added based on the black diamond at the bottom of the plot.

You see that the overall effect size estimate now is so much smaller than before.

Yet it still is statistically significant.

But of course, adding effect sizes that were in fact not found in the literature can be tricky.

Therefore, the trim and fill method should be used with care.

For instance, you can use it as a kind of sensitivity analysis.

You explore whether the trim and fill method would change your conclusions.

If so, you have to warn the reader that there may be an issue of publication bias that would affect your conclusion.

But if not, it makes you more confident that your conclusions are credible.

A drawback of the trim and fill method, however, is that it can lead to wrong conclusions if there is heterogeneity.

Also aggressive regression can be used to obtain a bias corrected estimate because a standard error is used as a predictor in the regression model.

The intercept can be interpreted as the expected effect size if the standard error is zero.

So for infinitely large studies.

Therefore the intercept can be considered as an estimate of the mean effect size that is free of publication bias.

Another approach is the use of selection models in which we account for the process of selecting studies for publication.

The starting point is the assumption that the the larger the p value, the harder it is to publish the results.

Studies with large p values therefore may be under represented in the metalytic data set.

In this approach, we try to describe this relationship.

You can use a discrete function for instance saying that there is a given probability of publication for a p value larger than10 a larger probability for a p value between10 and 0.05 an even larger probability for a p value between 0.05 and 0.01 and so on.

But you could also use a continuous version in which the probability of publication is increasing gradually with an increasing uh p value with a decreasing p value.

The function can be defined in advance or one can try to derive the function using the data.

In a meta analysis, one tries to compensate for the under representation of studies with large p values by giving larger weights to studies with larger p values.

Although this is an interesting approach to correct for publication bias, it's rather complex and tech it's a rather complex and technical approach.

Moreover, there is always the risk that the weight function that links the publication probability and the p value is misspecified.

Moreover, especially if you want to derive the weight function using your data, you need a large number of studies, say more than 100.

Still another approach is the puniform approach.

Here the underlying idea is that if there is no publication bias and you would test the null hypothesis that the overall effect size is equal to the real value, the p values would follow a uniform distribution.

In the puniform approach, we will use only the data of studies that found significant results because we can assume that for this set there was no bias.

All findings were published.

We then calculate for these studies the p values that would be obtained when testing that the overall effect size is equal to our estimated overall effect size.

If our overall effect size estimate would be unbiased, we therefore can expect that the p values are uniformly distributed.

If the distribution of p values deviates significantly from a uniform distribution, this is therefore an indication that there is publication bias.

A bi corrected estimate for this overall effect size is obtained by investigating for which value the distribution of p values is closest to a uniform distribution.

Another potential issue is the following.

Sometimes we obtain effect sizes that are that are far away from other effect sizes and these outliers can have an important impact on our met analytic findings and therefore may give a biased idea of what is typically observed.

I have shown this forest plot before.

You see that the effect size that I have highlighted is about 1.2 whereas most effect sizes vary between zero and 0.5.

Such a large value can increase substantially the mean effect size estimate.

But here you note that this large effect size also has a broad confidence interval.

So probably this effect size comes from a small study.

Because of the small precision, the weight that is given to this effect size in the meta analysis is not very high.

So maybe this outlying value does not really have an important impact on the results.

Let's look first how you can detect outliers.

The first way is visually like we did in the forest plot in the previous slide.

In the final funnel plot on this slide, you can see that there are four studies with somewhat outlying observed effect sizes.

Study 8, study 56, and studies 47 and 48.

VBA and Chung proposed to look at the studentized deleted residuals for the study.

You calculate the difference between the observed effect size and the estimated effect size for that study but estimated in a meta analysis without that study.

Hence the minus i in annotation.

This deviation is standardized by dividing it by the corresponding standard error.

If you look at all the standardized deleted residuals, you see again that studies 8, 47, 48, and 56 stand out.

You can also calculate how much the estim the estimated effect sizes for all case studies change when dropping study I.

You can calculate the cook's distance to express the size of the change.

Again, the same studies pop up.

A third way to detect influential outliers is to look at how much the covariance matrix of the parameter estimates changes.

For a random effects model without moderators, this matrix includes only one value, the sampling variance of the overall effect estimate.

To express the impact of dropping study I, you can calculate the ratio of the sampling variance of the mean effect estimate without and with accounting for study I.

If the ratio is smaller than one, this means that the sampling variance is larger when study I is included.

In other words, that including study I reduces the precision.

Again, you can see that this is the case for the same four studies.

When there are outlying values in your data set, it's important to reflect on where they come from.

One explanation is that you made an error in the calculation of the effect size.

Another explanation is that the data that were reported are not correct.

In one of our meta analysis, we wrote to the research research team of a paper to ask whether they could check their data because the effect size that we found for their study was considerably larger than the effect size we found for other papers.

And indeed, the authors replied that they found an error in their calculations.

So after correcting the error, the effect size for their study was very much in line with those of other studies.

In these cases, it's of course important to correct the errors.

If you really have strong doubts about the correctness of data, but correcting the data is not possible, you can leave out the outlier.

Another explanation is that a study in which an outlying effect size was observed differs substantially from the other studies.

For instance, in a population of participants or in the study setup.

In this situation, it's probably a good idea to leave out that paper or to discuss that paper separately but not include it in the meta analysis.

Another explanation can however be that an extreme value was found by coincidence.

If effect sizes are indeed normally distributed, it is to be expected that from time to time you will find an extreme value.

Automatically dropping effect sizes that are somewhat larger or smaller therefore may give a biased view on the average effect or especially on the size of the between study variance.

If you find outlying values and you are sure that they were correctly calculated and they come from studies that are otherwise comparable to the other studies, I suggest to do a sensitivity analysis.

The idea is that you look at what these outlying values mean for the conclusions of your meta analysis.

A first kind of sensitivity analysis is to leave out one study at a time and redo the meta analysis.

If you would have 100 effect sizes from 100 studies, this would mean that you would do 100 meta analysis each combining 99 effect sizes.

If you would find that your conclusions remain the same, for instance, that there is a significant positive effect, that would strengthen your confidence in this conclusion.

If however the conclusions change, for instance, if sometimes the mean effect size would be significant, sometimes not, you are less certain about your conclusion.

In that case, it's also important to share your uncertainty with a reader of your research report.

As an alternative sensitivity analysis, you can leave out all outlying values at the same time and compare the results with the results of the analysis, including all effect sizes.

Third, it is important to check whether the assumptions you made in the analysis make sense and to be transparent on these checks.

First assumption that is made when using a fixed effects model is that all population effects sizes are exactly the same.

So that there is no heterogeneity.

When including a moderator the assumption is somewhat relaxed.

Conditionally on the value of the moderator there is no heterogeneity or in other words the moderator explains all potential heterogeneity.

Of course, you could do a homogeneity test to test whether there is convincing evidence of heterogeneity.

But unfortunately, this test is not without problems.

For instance, the power can be low.

Therefore, before using a fixed effects model, it is vital that you reflect on whether you can re really expect that there is no heterogeneity.

Only when studies were set up in exactly the same way or when you are sure that study characteristics that may affect the size of the effect are included in your model, it makes sense to use a fixed effects model.

But because this assumption is very often unlikely, it's probably better to use a random effects model by default.

In the random effects model, on the contrary, you do not assume a common population effect size, but rather you assume a distribution of population effect sizes.

Techniques to estimate the model parameters often assume that again after correcting for potential moderator variables, the population effect sizes follow a normal distribution.

To check this, you could make use of a QQ plot.

Here a QQ plot for the effect sizes from the teacher expectancy meta analysis of Renbush.

On the Y-axis you have the standardized deviations of the observed effect sizes from the mean effect size.

These are the deviations divided by their standard error.

On the X-axis you have the standard normal distribution.

There were 19 studies.

So 19 deviations.

For the smallest deviation, the first of the 19 deviations, the theoretical quantile quantile is calculated as the ZV valueue from a standard normal distribution for which the cumulative density is equal to 1 minus.5 divided by 19.

Similarly, the theoretical quantile for the 18th deviation is 1.41.

If the effect sizes are normally distributed, you expect that the dots are more or less on one straight line.

Fortunately, the results are quite robust for violation of this normality assumption.

So unless the QQplot shows an important deviation from a normal distribution, you should you do not have to worry too much.

Later on we will see how we can obtain robust standard errors uh for constructing confidence intervals or performing significance tests by using RVE.

In this approach we do not make the assumption of normality.

So it can be a safer approach.

Further we assume that effect sizes are statistically independent which means that one effect size does not give information on another effect size.

The assumption can be violated when you have multiple effect sizes from one study.

The effect sizes from the same study are probably more alike in effect sizes from different studies because the effect sizes from one study may be based on the same sample or at least on very similar samples.

Similarly, also the dependent and the independent variables may be measured in a more similar way for the different effect sizes from the same study.

If there is dependency, it is good to account for this dependency.

For instance, by using multi-level models which will be discussed in a later screencast.

We also assume that the between study variance is the same for all studies.

Also, in a categorical moderator analysis, we assume typically that the between study variance is the same for all categories.

This assumption may be violated.

For instance, suppose you make a distinction between studies done in the US and studies done in the rest of the world.

It's quite possible that the variation between studies in the US is smaller than the variation between studies in the rest of the world.

In some software packages such as in such as in the comprehensive meta analysis software, you can choose whether you assume a common between study variance in all categories or whether you want to estimate a between study variance parameter for each category separately.

Of course, in the last case, you need sufficient studies in each category to be able to get a good estimate of the category specific variance.

In this way we arrive to another assumption.

The assumption that we have sufficient studies.

This is not a problem when using a fixed effects model.

In a fixed effects model you can easily combine the results of two studies.

But when using random effects model we are estimating the between study variance and this variance is also used to weight um effect sizes and to obtain standard errors.

And it is clear that with only two studies you cannot obtain a good estimate of the between study variance.

Ideally you have at least about 20 studies.

You could also do meta analysis with for instance only 10 studies but then you have to be very prudent with the results.

And of course if you want to do moderator analysis 10 studies is likely a too small number of studies.

Another assumption is that the observed effect sizes are unbiased estimates of the population effect sizes.

That's the reason why we apply HCH's correction factor to the standardized mean difference.

Otherwise, the observed effect sizes are somewhat biased for smaller studies.

We also assume that the sampling distribution of our observed effect sizes is a normal distribution.

We have seen that the sampling distribution of the correlation can be skewed especially for small sample sizes and when the population correlation is close to minus1 or + one that also that is also the reason why we typically use fisher transformations.

This transformation makes the sampling distribution more symmetric and normal.

Similarly, the odds ratio has a skew distribution, but the loss ratio has an approximately normal sampling distribution.

Next, in a systematic review, we typically aim to find all existing studies that are relevant for our research interest.

Of course, we probably will not be able to retrieve all relevant studies, but at least we make the assumption that our sample of studies is a random sample from all existing studies.

Here you can see a link with publication bias.

If you include published studies only, then your sample of studies is not a random sample from the population of existing studies.

This is not a problem in say but when your sample of studies systematically differs from the population of ex of all existing studies there is a risk that the effect sizes you found are also not representative for the effect sizes that were observed.

In other words, there is a risk of bias.

Finally, if you do a meta regression analysis, you assume that the association between the effect size and the moderator is linear.

It's a good idea to make a regression plot to check this assumption visually.

Of course, also here a sufficiently large number of effect sizes is needed in order to make a distinction between different kinds of association.

======================================================================
Meta Analysis 09 Meta analysis with R
======================================================================

In this video, I will show how you can analyze a meta analytic data set using R.

I will demonstrate the use of R for meta analysis uh by this example.

So we have discussed this example during the workshop.

This is a data set that was collected by Steve Rodenbush. um a data set consisting of 19 studies evaluating the teacher expectancy effect.

In all these studies, the teacher was told by the researcher that some students were relatively strong students and other students were relatively weak students without there being a real difference between these two groups of students.

And then after a certain period of time it was assessed whether the teacher gave higher scores to the so-called strong students.

So in these studies um it was evaluated whether the expectancies that teachers have about their students affect their uh scores their gradings of these students.

In this table you can see the results of these 19 studies.

So the column G refers to the standardized mean difference with a positive G referring to an an effect going in the direction that was expected.

So a positive G means that students that were called strong students indeed got higher grades than uh students called weaker students.

In the last column, you can see the standard error or the standard deviation of a sampling distribution of the effect size.

As rule of thumb, if G is at least twice as large as its standard error, then this means that this observed effect size is statistically significant at the 0.05 05 significance level which is not often case as you can see in this this set this set of 19 studies.

Let's analyze this data.

You can install R and you can install R studio on your own computer by downloading uh these programs for free uh from these websites.

So we are going to use R studio.

If you installed RNR studio and you open studio then you get this window on the left side in the the left upper corner you can you get uh a script which is empty for now.

You can type in commands in this script and save these commands so that you can use these commands afterwards in the next session.

If you type in a command and your cursor is in that line and you push on controll enter then this command will be automatically copied to the window below the so-called console and this command will be executed and you will see or sometimes you will see output in this console.

I have already prepared an R script for you with all the commands that we are going to use to analyze the data set crowd bush with a uh the 19 step.

You can open the R script.

You can find the R script on Toledo under course documents software R.

So please um save this R script on your own computer and then open it in R by using file open file and so on.

Next we are going to make use of the package metaphor.

A lot of people prepared packages. packages that are meant to do specific analysis.

We are going to use the package metaphor, a package that was developed by Holang Vikpower from the University of Mr. to perform meta analysis.

To use this or to install this package, you click on packages, then you click on install.

You type in the name of the package metaphor and you install that package.

Once you have installed a package, you have to tell R that you want to use this package.

So you can do this um by typing the command library metaphor.

You can see this command in uh the R studio script Renbush.

So you go with your cursor on that line and you push controll enter.

So in that way you will see that uh the li the metaphor package is loaded.

So it is ready for use.

Now you have to install a package only once.

So once you have installed the package you can use it in next sessions as well.

But for each session in which you want to use the package metaphor, you have to reload the package metaphor.

So you have to execute again the line library metaphor.

Next, I also prepared a data set including the data um a data set called Renom Bush.

It's an an Excel file.

You can find this Excel file as well on Toledo under course documents software R.

So go to or or save that uh Excel sheet on your own computer and then import data set in R studio by clicking on import data set next from Excel and so on.

You open the data set.

So you you import the data set and by importing the data set you immediately see how the data set set looks like.

So you have four columns.

A column with a study number, a column with a weeks of prior contact.

I will talk more about that later.

A column with a standardized mean differences and a column with the standard errors.

Now what we need to perform a meta analysis using the metaphor package is at least two columns.

We need a column with the effect sizes.

So here column G.

But we also need a column with the sampling variances.

So the variance of the sampling distribution of the effect sizes.

We do not have that column here.

But what we have instead here is the standard error which is the square root of the sampling variance.

So in the next step we are going to make a new variable variable with a sampling variances and this new variable should be equal to the squared standard errors.

So this is what is done in the next lines um included in the R script.

So routen bush dollar sign var refers to a new variable to be created a variable called var which is part of the data set which will be part of the data set bush and this new variable is equal to and you can see that in r we also uh sometimes write um an arrow instead of an equal sign.

So the new variable var in the data set Ren bush is equal to the variable standard error from the data set Ren bush squared.

So the head two means squared by exe line you see that in the data set automatically a new variable is added.

So now we are ready to analyze or met analyze the data set.

Let's look at the first analysis.

So I use the command RMA which is a function within the package metaphor.

The analysis should be done on the dependent variable G.

So that's a variable including the um the v the the effect sizes.

A var refers to the sampling variances.

The data can be found in a data set called trrowen bush.

The method we are going to use in this first analysis is the fixed effects method.

So we are going to use a fixed effects model assuming that the population effect size is exactly the same in all 19 studies.

And this analysis I am going to give a name to this analysis.

More specifically I'm going to give it the name FEM fixed effects model.

So FEM is a name I gave myself to this analysis.

By running this line, the analysis will be done.

But you will not immediately see output.

To see the output, you can also execute the line summary and then between parenthesis FM.

If you do so, you get uh for instance this output.

You can see that the estimate which refers to the estimate of the overall population effect size, the estimate is equal to 0.06.

Think back of the guidelines of Cohen.

Cohen set well standardized mean difference of 20 can be called a small effect 50 a moderate effect and 80 a large effect.

So this means that on average the effect seems to be very very small.

You also get the standard error of these estimates.

Dividing the estimate by the standard error gives us a value of 1.65.

You can can compare this value to a standard normal distribution to assess the statistical significance.

When testing the null hypothesis that the effect is equal to zero, this ratio of estimate divided by the standard error will follow a standard normal distribution.

So you get a value of 1.65 which is not very very large.

Um so you have a probability of almost 10% to obtain a ZV valueue that is even farther away from zero if the null hypothesis is true.

So we conclude this p value is not very small.

So this result is statistically not significant.

Um so on average we do not have enough evidence to say that there is a teacher expectancy effect.

You also get a confidence interval a 95% confidence interval with uh limits uh equal to minus.01 and plus.13.

So you see that zero is included in the confidence interval confirming again that zero can be possibly uh the real population value so that we doubt or or that we do not have enough evidence to reject the null hypothesis.

So on average we do not see really see an effect a teacher expectancy effect by typing forest and then between the parentheses is the name of the analysis you get a forest plot for this fixed effects model analysis.

Um so you get for each of the 19 studies a confidence interval around the observed effect size.

Um you can see that in most of the studies zero is included in the confidence interval.

So in most of the studies we do not really have evidence for uh a teacher expectancy effect if you take all evidence together you get a mean effect of 0.06 but with a confidence interval that includes zero.

So again this says we do not have really convincing evidence of a teacher expectancy if but as we have seen during the workshop very often there are a lot of differences between studies.

There can be differences in the kind of participants in the study context in the outcome variable in the way the independent variable or the treatment is operationalized in the design and so on.

So there can be a lot of differences between studies.

Probably here there are as well some differences between the 19 studies.

And it is maybe unlikely that none of these differences affect the size of the effect.

So maybe the assumption that we made when using a fixed effects model, the assumption that all population effect sizes for all 19 studies are exactly the same.

Maybe this assumption is not real.

Maybe each study has its own population effect size.

So maybe there is a a distribution of population effect sizes.

So this would mean that now we say well maybe there are two sources of variation.

On top of the sampling variation, there is also variation between the true effect sizes, between the population effect sizes.

You can test this hypothesis.

This hypothesis that all population effect sizes are exactly the same.

So the hypothesis of homogeneity.

The alternative hypothesis is that not all population effect sizes are the same.

So that at least one population effect size differs from at least at least one other population effect size.

We have seen how we can test this.

We can use a Q statistic which is a kind of weighted uh sum of squares.

And if the null hypothesis is correct then this Q statistic follows a k square distribution with degrees of freedom equal to uh the number of studies minus one.

In fact, when we did the analysis in R, um the result of this statistical analysis is also included in the output.

You can see that the Q uh statistic is has a value equal to 35.83 with uh 18 degrees of freedom.

This gives us a p value that is very small.

P value equal to 0.0074.

So based on this homogeneity test, yeah, we are likely to going to reject the null hypothesis and we are going to conclude that there is systematic heterogeneity that there is variance between population effect sizes.

So that it is not a good idea to use a fixed effects model.

Maybe it's a better idea to use a random effects model. a random effects model that assumes that population effect sizes that can differ from each other and more specifically that there is a normal distribution of population effect sizes.

So when using such a random effects model we are going to estimate the mean of this red distribution.

So the mean population effect size as well as the variation between the population effect sizes.

You can see that commands uh look very similar as when using a fixed effects model but instead now we say method is equal to raml.

Raml stands for restricted maximum likelihood and that's one way to estimate um the between study variance.

Now in the output you can see that you get uh somewhat similar output but on top of that you also get an estimate of the of to squared which refers to uh the estimate of the variance between population effect sizes.

So the variance between population effect sizes is estimated to be equal to 0.019 with a standard error of 0.050.

You also get I squared.

I squar refers to the proportion of the variance of the total variance that is due to variance between population effect sizes.

So about 42% of the total variance and the total variance is equal to the population uh the variance in population effect sizes plus the sampling variance.

So about 42% of this variance is variance between population effect sizes and so about 58% is sampling variance.

So this um yeah proportion is relatively large.

So again it's an indication that yeah maybe it was not a good idea to use a fixed effects model and it may be better to use a random effects model.

But then if you look at the the results or the estimate uh which is the estimate of the mean population effect size you can see that this effect size is rather similar than uh the estimate we have seen before.

Now it is 0.08 with a standard error of 0.05.

Again the z value is not that large.

It is 1.62 which gives a p value again close to 10.

So again the conclusion is we do not have really enough evidence to conclude that there is on average a teacher expectancy effect.

So in this forest plot you can see that that I made uh in Excel.

You can see um confidence intervals for each individual study but also the result of the fixed effects model and the results of the analysis using a random effects model.

But there is an additional column in the data set weeks of prior contact.

In some of the studies, the teacher did not know the students before the start of the study.

And you can imagine that in these studies, maybe the induced teacher expectancy effect better succeeded.

So it it was easier for researchers to convince teachers that indeed some of these students were stronger than some other students.

Whereas if students were already known for several weeks by the teacher probably the effect that the that the researcher has on the teacher expectancy will be smaller.

So the teacher will not be convinced when the researcher is saying these and these students are strong students and these and these students are weaker students.

So you could expect that if teachers are influenced by their expecties that this will be most um clearly visible in studies in which there was no prior contact between teachers and students.

So when the weeks of prior contact was equal to zero rather than one, two or three and by the way three means three weeks or more than three weeks of prior contact.

In this plot I ordered the effect sizes according to the weeks of prior contact.

And indeed you can see that by visual inspection that when there was no prior contact the effect was not that small.

It was positive.

With one week of prior contact, the effect on in on average is somewhat smaller.

After two weeks, it is still somewhat smaller and after 3 weeks, it is about zero or even slightly negative.

Let's do another meta analysis including the weeks of prior contact as a moderator variable.

So in the first model we use the weeks of prior contact as a categorical moderator and we assume that within categories so within studies with zero weeks of prior contact or within a category with one week of prior contact and so on there are no differences between population effect sizes.

So therefore we still call this model a fixed effects model but this time with a categorical moderator.

So within categories we assume that population effect sizes are the same but possibly there are differences between the between the categories.

We can also fit a model a random effects model with a categorical moderator.

In this situation, we say well there can be differences between categories but on top of that within categories there can still be differences between population effect sizes.

So now in fact we have three sources of variation.

We have the variation due to the category.

We have variation due to differences between population effect sizes within categories.

And a third source of variation is the sampling variation.

Population effect size for a specific study is not a exact not necessarily um be equal to the observed effect size in that study because in that study only a sample was used.

Take into account um the number of weeks of prior contact.

There are no differences anymore.

There is no heterogenity. when using random effects model.

Well, first look at the estimates.

You get exactly the same estimates as before.

Why is this?

Well, this is because and this you can see on top because the estimated to squar is equal to zero.

So indeed there are no differences anymore within categories.

We explained all variance between population effect sizes and therefore the fixed effects model with the categorical moderator gives us exactly the same results as the random effects model with a categorical moderator.

By the way, this is not a very common situation.

Very often when we include a moderator or even when we include multiple moderators we succeed in explaining part of the variance but it is very unlikely that we will explain all variance.

So typically to squar is still somewhat larger than zero.

We hope that we can explain as much as possible but it is seldomly the case that we explain everything.

So here everything is explained R squar is equal to 100%. we can also include uh weeks of prior contact as a continuous moderator variable.

So the advantage so and perform a kind of regression analysis.

The advantage is that now um yeah we only have two parameters to estimate. we have to estimate the intercept as well as the slope of the regression line.

Whereas before when we use weeks of prior contact as a categorical variable, we had to estimate four parameters.

We had to estimate the intercept.

So the expected effect in the reference category as well as um yeah the contrast between the three other categories compared to the reference category.

So this is a more yeah it's a simpler model but a drawback of this model is that maybe this model is not very realistic.

Maybe the trend is not a linear trend but as you can see in this scatter plot the trend looks indeed more or less linear.

So it's not such a bad idea to use a regression model in this sit.

The syntax looks very similar as before, but this time we do not say that weeks is a categorical variable.

So we do not say that it is a factor.

We simply write mods is equal to weeks.

You can see the intercept of 41 which is the expected standardized mean difference if there was no prior contact.

So if the weeks of prior contact is equal to zero.

If there was one week of prior contact the expected effect is decreasing with 16.

So after one week the expected effect is 41 minus 16.

After 2 weeks the expected effect is 41 minus 2 * 16 and so on.

You can al also use random effects model with a continuous moderator.

But now again the the results are exactly the same as before.

And why is this?

This is because the to squar estimate is equal to zero.

So it seems that we explained all variation between population effect sizes by including weeks as a continuous variable.

So there is no residual variance no population no variance anymore between population effect sizes after accounting for the weeks of prior contact.

So the random effects model simplifies or reduces to a fixed effects model.

So we have discussed six models.

Fixed effects models and random effects models without moderators with weeks of prior contact as a categorical moderator or with weeks of prior contact as a continuous moderator.

And in these analysis, yeah, we have answered the basic or the yeah the most common metalic questions.

Is there an overall effect?

How large is the effect?

Is the effect the same in all studies?

So, is there an overall effect?

No, apparently not.

We do not have enough evidence that on average there is an effect.

How large is the effect?

We estimated size of the effect when using random effects model. 08.

Is the effect the same in all studies?

No, apparently not.

Our homogeneity test concluded that there are systematic differences between population effect sizes.

So it's not a good idea to use a fixed effects model without moderators.

Uh so it's a better idea to use a random effects model.

But when using a random effects model without moderators, you simply can estimate the variance between population effect sizes.

But it's a good idea to try to explain this variation.

By the way, we found and this is the fourth question, we found that the variation between studies was about 0.09.

And finally, when we try to explain this variation, we found that um if we include weeks of prior contacts as a categorical variable or as a continuous variable, we found that this variable indeed moderated the size of the effect.

So the size of the effect depends of the on the weeks of prior contact.

So the more prior contact there was the smaller the size of the effect that was found in the studies and we even uh yeah managed to um explain 100% of the between study heterogenity.

Final remark.

As explained in one of the videos, it is good idea to do some checks to assess the credibility of your results.

First, it is good to check whether there is evidence for publication buys.

By typing funnel with the name of your analysis, you get a funnel plot.

The plot suggests that there may be publication buys.

Without publication buys, you would expect a symmetric plot with on top of the plot.

This is for larger studies.

Less variation than at the bottom of the plot.

This is for smaller studies, but with observed effect sizes varying around the same value regardless of the sample size.

Here however we see that for small studies the observed effect sizes are generally larger which indicates that small studies with small effect sizes or even negative effect sizes are missing in our metalytic data set on to you will also find the R codes for making a period plot to calculate a rank correlation perform a regression test and apply the trim and fill method to correct for bias.

In the same script, you can see how you can make several plots to detect outline and influential studies.

For instance, by replacing the dots by numbers in the final plot, you see that studies four and 10 are relatively outlying.

This is confirmed in plots with a standardized residuals, the cook's distances and the co-variance ratios.

Leaving out these two studies, study four and study 10 also gives a somewhat different results.

Also reflect on the assumptions that are made.

It is probably a good idea to make a QQ plot as well.

Here the distribution looks reasonably normal.

======================================================================
Meta Analysis 10 Multilevel meta analysis ZPID Research Synthesis 2018
======================================================================

Thank you very much for the introduction.

Also, thank you for inviting me.

Um, it's a really exciting conference.

I'm sorry that I could not attend yesterday and before yesterday.

I had to examine my poor students yesterday.

So, I can only attend today.

So I'm going to talk about the use of multi-level models for performing meta analysis.

And so my talk will consist of several parts.

First I will introduce uh multi-level analysis.

Afterwards I will talk about how you can consider meta analysis as a specific case of multi-level analysis.

Afterwards I will talk about some opportunities um when you use multi the multi-level modeling framework for analyzing pro data over studies or for analyzing uh effect sizes.

Afterwards, I will say something about when and how multi-level models are used for performing meta analysis.

And finally, I want to give some ideas, some reflections on how you can present the results of multi-level meta analysis.

So first short introduction in multi-level analysis and I will use an example uh data collected in Flanders in Flemish part of Belgium uh longitudinal study in which uh more than 6,000 students were measured uh five measurement occasions during their secondary education 6,000 more than 6,000 students coming from 57 schools and so here for instance you can see part of the data so on the xaxis You can see the performance of the students on an exam of mathematics in the beginning of of secondary education.

On the y-axis you can see the performance of the students on the mathematics exam at the end of secondary at the end of the second year of secondary education.

And of course you can see a positive linear relationship that can be described using an accretion equation aggression equation that can also be used to make predictions.

But there is a problem with this kind of analysis in this kind of data sets.

The problem is that here students are nested within schools.

So you have several students coming from the same school and this can make that residuals are not independent.

Whereas this is an assumption in ordinary regression analysis.

What does it mean?

Well, suppose there is a school that is performing very good.

So in the sense that that teaching is very good and this makes that uh students are performing better than you would expect at the end of the second year then you would expect based on their score uh in the beginning of secondary education or there may be a school that is not doing such a good job and then you can see that that the scores of these students are lower than you would expect.

So you can see now that the residuals are not independent.

If a new student is saying well I'm from school too you can already expect that for this student you also will have a positive residual.

So in other words positive residuals of the students of that school too will give information on the residual uh of that new student.

So residuals are not independent.

Why is this a problem?

Well, if residuals or if students are nested within schools and if there are differences between schools, then this means that there is some overlap of information.

Um there is well students are to a certain extent copies of other students from the same school.

So there's overlap in information and if we do not take this into account then we are overestimating the total amount of information we have.

And from a statistical point of view, this is reflected in two small standard errors.

And if we use these standard errors to perform statistical significance tests, this will make that the type one error rate is not under control that we make too many type one errors.

So if another hypothesis is correct, we will too easily reject this null hypothesis.

What can be the solution?

Well, we could do separate regression analysis for each school.

But remember in this data set we had 57 schools.

So this would mean that we have to do 57 separate meta analys um regression analysis.

This could be a solution as you see in this graph because now the residuals are independent for each school.

Now you have positive residuals as well as negative residuals.

So residuals do not give information anymore on the residual of a new student.

But this is not yeah here you can see the separate regression equations for each of the uh capital J schools but this is not a very efficient way.

We have to do 57 analysis and maybe for some schools we only have data from a few students which means that yeah parameter estimates will be not very reliable.

Also in this way we cannot study to what extent there are differences between schools.

An alternative is that we use school dummy variables in our regression analysis.

Then we can do one regression analysis but you will have a lot of coefficients.

So here for instance we have a dummy variable for school two dummy variable for school three and until school 57.

So this would mean that we have instead of one intercept we have 57 coefficients and instead of one uh regression weight for our x variable we will again have 57 uh coefficients.

So we have two times 57 regression coefficients which is of course not very efficient.

How can we solve this?

Well a multi-level analysis can be a solution.

So the idea is well we start from an equation the equation that I showed before but now I added an index J referring to the score also the intercept and regression weight of X gets an index J which means these coefficients can vary over schools and this variation is described with additional equations equations.

So the first equation is describing the variation within schools.

These equations are describing the variation over schools.

So what does it mean?

So the weight regression weight of X depends on the school.

And here we say when it is equal to an overall slope plus random residual residual that is typical to the school.

And so what is nice about multi-level models is that we do not have to estimate all these betas.

We do not have to estimate regression coefficients for each school separately.

We simply estimate the mean intercept, the mean slope as well as the variances and the coariance.

I did this analysis for the example.

You get very similar um uh regression coefficients here.

But now this analysis takes into account um when testing these parameters that students are nested within schools.

So standardize will be larger.

You can also uh you get also information about the variation between schools in the intercept and in the slope also coariation.

So positive coariation means that if for a specific school the intercept is higher you would also expect that for that school the slope is higher.

Afterwards if you want you can also estimate the individual betas.

And so based on these estimates I I compose this graph.

So for each school you can see a blue regression line and the red line refers to the mean intercept and the mean slope over all schools.

Of course if there is variation between schools in intercept and in slope it can be interesting um to try to explain why there is variation.

So maybe we can include characteristics school characteristics in these equations at the second level.

For instance, in the example, I included a dummy variable indicating whether this school is a private school rather than a public school.

And these are the results.

So for public schools, the intercept is 13.73.

For private schools, the intercept is 1.12 points lower.

Yeah.

So 13.73 minus 1.12.

The slope for private schools is slightly higher than for public schools.

Okay, this is illustrated in this graph.

So we have an interaction effect.

This term in fact is an interaction term.

It's cross level interaction between um yeah the mathematics zero and the type of school.

So in this example we had a two-level structure.

So we have students nested within schools.

But of course this structure it can also be recognized if we have repeated measures.

If we have repeated measures um then again we have two levels and at both at both levels there can be variation.

So we have at the second level subjects and within subjects we have repeated measurements can be variation between measurements within subjects can be variation between subjects and we can try to explain this variation by including characteristics.

It can be more complicated for instance well in the data set that I discussed uh some analysis were done using four level models.

So we have schools but in some of the schools more than one class was uh was studied within classes you have multiple students and students were repeatedly measured.

So we have a fourlevel structure.

Um okay how does it look like such a this is a four a three-level model.

So compared to the two-level model we have an additional index K and so the coefficients at the first level can vary randomly over the second level units possibly we can uh we can explain part of the variance by including characteristics um and then these coefficients in turn can vary over third level units.

So to summarize why would we use multi-level models?

First reason is a statistical reason.

We take into account the nesting of units in higher level units and so this makes sure that type one rate will not be exceeded.

But there is also a conceptual reason of course in this kind of data sets.

It's interesting to study to what extent are there differences between schools or between classes and why where do these differences come from?

Can we explain these differences by including school or class characteristics?

This was my short introduction in multi-level analysis.

Now meta analysis as a specific situation or specific um instance of a multi-level analysis.

So in our example we had two levels.

We had students nested within schools.

In fact in meta analysis we have a very similar structure.

We have we have multiple studies and within studies we typically have multiple participants and there can be variation between participants from the same study but there can also be variation between studies and it's interesting to study why there is variation.

We can include stud characteristics.

We can include participant characteristics to try to explain this variation at the two levels.

How does this multilevel look multi-level model look like?

Well, suppose you have a set of studies and in each study you have control group and an experimental group.

Well, you could use this model, this equation to describe the variation within the study.

So, it's a simple model.

Our dependent variable is regressed on a treatment dummy variable to indicate whether this person is part of of the treatment group rather than the control group.

And so how do we have to interpret this?

Well, so the beta zero intercept is the expected value for somebody from the control group.

Yeah.

So it's the expected value or the the population mean of the control condition in that study.

The effect of treatment is what is added to this expected value if somebody belongs to the treatment group rather than to the control group.

And so this coefficient refers to the mean difference um the population mean difference between these two conditions.

So you see it's it's a measure of effect the effect of the treatment.

So the effect of the treatment is expressed by this coefficient beta one and the variation well it's possible that the intercept as well as the effect the treatment effect can vary over studies and this variation can be described using additional equations.

So the intercept is equal to a mean plus random deviation random effect that is typical to that study.

Same for a treatment effect.

So the mean here you have the mean treatment effect or the overall treatment effect and this is a random residual specific to that study.

Of course it's also interesting to study the between study heterogeneity in treatment effects.

This is expressed using this parameter.

So the variance between studies in the treatment effect.

So you can recognize the parameters that we typically estimate in a meta analysis.

To illustrate this, I simulated a small data set using this population model.

So um the mean intercept.

So the overall expected value in control condition is equal to one.

The overall treatment effect is equal to one.

But there is some variation between studies in both coefficients and at the first level within studies uh you have residual variation of one.

I simulated data from 30 studies with each two groups of 30 units.

I analyzed the data using the level analysis and so here are the parameter estimates.

You can see that well these parameters are quite close to the population values.

Um but of course if I I would have thrown another sample would have simulated another data set these values would have been slightly different and and maybe now this value is slightly smaller.

Maybe by simulating another data set that value would be larger than one.

Yeah.

Of course you could say well this is not a typical meta analysis.

In a typical meta analysis, yeah, you you have data from several studies and in these different studies typically outcome variable is not measured on exactly the same scale.

So we have to standardize the data.

Okay, one way of standardizing the data is by dividing the dependent variable by the standard deviation within the study.

In fact, an estimate of this parameter is the pulled standard deviation which is also used when we used when we uh when we calculate a standardized mean difference.

So in fact the coefficient now it was a mean difference now it is a standardized mean difference that you recognize from that analysis. uh I I put here primes because yeah the parameters of course change or can change but otherwise it remains the same model you can again use multi-level uh modeling software um so let's look again at a simulated data set so now parameter estimates or the population parameters remain exactly the same because already in the first uh uh data set the variance within studies was one so standard izing doesn't make a difference here.

But now in the simulated data set, I analyze the data after standardizing the data within each study with an estimate of the um of the the within study residual um standard deviation.

And so you get uh similar results as the ones I've used before in a real meta analysis.

Of course again this is not a realistic situation because in a real meta analysis we typically do not have the data of each individual participant.

Yeah.

So such an ordinary multi-level analysis is not possible.

So rather instead of having the data from each individual participant we have data we have summary statistics about the sample of participants within each study.

We might have uh test statistics, means, standard deviations and so on or effect sizes.

Um and yeah, we can do we can use these effect sizes to perform a met analysis.

Typically for common uh effect sizes, we also know or we we the sampling variance or we can obtain good estimates of the sampling variance.

So the sampling variance or the variance at this first level does not have to be estimated anymore.

Sorry.

So we only have to estimate uh the variance at the study level.

But otherwise we can use the same framework.

Let's look at at the model I've showed before.

So remember that this parameter is a standardized mean difference.

So what if we have effect sizes?

Well, a standardized mean difference that is estimated um in a specific study in fact is an estimate of this beta y prime.

So it's an estimate of the population effect size.

Of course it's possible that the effect that the estimate is slightly too high or too low.

So there is a residual and uh the residual we assume that these residuals from a normal distribution with a variance that we do not have to estimate anymore.

We already know that frequency at the second level.

So here this equation remains the same equation.

Yeah.

So the population effect size is equal to a mean effect size plus random residual typical to that study.

Let's look at the results of the simulated data set.

So in a simulated data set I calculated uh observed effect sizes or standardized mean differences for each of the individual studies and I analyzed them using such a multi-level model for effect sizes and look at the values you get exactly the same values for the mean effect as well as for the variance between studies in the effect.

So this is just to show that effect sizes in this situation are sufficient.

We have we do not need more information than information we have with these effect sizes.

Now, why would we use a multi-level model for analyzing or meta analyzing data?

Well, first I'm going to talk about the meta analysis of raw data.

You can say well typically we do not have raw data but sometime sometimes we do.

And to illustrate this, I will uh discuss a reanalysis of a meta analysis that was done by Terry Shan.

She did a meta analysis on several single case studies.

Single case studies that studied the effect of choice making or yeah she she looked at studies that investigated whether problem behavior of students in classes can be reduced by giving these students a choice in the activities or in the order of the activities.

And so she found several studies, single case studies and single case studies are experimental studies in which uh individual participants are measured repeatedly over time under different conditions.

So here without having the choice and with having the choice here are the data for one single participant from one of the studies.

And so for instance well this is a typical way in which uh the data are presented in single case studies.

So they are typically presented visually graphically and they're typically also analyzed visually so without statistical analysis.

But the nice thing about this tradition is that from these graphs we can retrieve raw data and so we can use multi-level models to analyze these data or to meta analyze the data over several studies.

Um so what do you see here?

Well first that person was measured during eight sessions without having the choice.

You can see that the problem behavior um is relatively large.

So this is percentage of intervals in which there was problem behavior.

In the second phase there were sessions in which the students could choose um the activities or the order of activities and then you can see that the problem behavior was reduced.

It's much lower.

Then in the third phase again they did not have the choice again problem behavior is larger.

Then in the fourth phase again there was no choice or they could choose again and so you can see that the problem behavior was reduced again.

So looking at this graph you can see that at least for this participant there seems to be an effect of um giving choice but we had uh data uh or Gary Shogun collected data from several studies and in some of these studies two three four cases or participants were studied.

So we had a lot of these time series graphs and so we have analyzed this data using this model.

So at the first level we say well the score is equal to uh an expected score in the baseline phase.

So without having the choice but something is added and here something negatively is added if uh people are getting the choice.

So problem behavior here is reduced.

So beta one is the size of the effect for this participant um of having the choice in the data set. uh we had 13 single case studies in total data from 30 cases.

So we used the tree level model to study variation between yeah measurement occasions within cases and of course we took into account whether at that moment they had a choice or not.

There can be variation between cases. can be variation between studies and we can try to explain this variation by including case and study characteristics.

So we use this model three level model here are the results.

So on average the intercept after standardizing the data for each study separately or for each case separately.

So on average the um yeah the amount of problem behavior in the control condition was 3 But you can see that the amount of problem behavior was reduced.

It was yeah more than 50% reduced by uh giving uh the students choice.

We can include characteristics of studies, characteristics of cases as moderator variables um or as as predictors in the second and the third level equations.

So at the second level we include included um the gender of the person.

At the third level we included well there were two types of studies.

In some studies the students could choose the activities.

In other studies the students could choose only the order of activities.

So we included here uh a predictor a dummy variable indicating whether they could choose the order rather than the activities themselves.

And so yeah here are the results.

So if you are talking about a female and if they could choose the activities themselves then the reduction of problem behavior was minus 2.86 but if it was a male then the reduction was somewhat smaller.

If they only could choose the order then the reduction was even smaller.

Okay so that's the meaning of these coefficients.

What is nice about the use of multi-level models is that multi-level models are very flexible.

So you can extend this simple model in several ways.

For instance, you can include or you can model autocorrelation.

You can model heterogeneity.

So you do not have to assume that the variance within the baseline faces for instance is the same as the variance within uh treatment phases.

You can also include additional coariantss at the first level.

For instance, if you have two treatments, you can use two dummy variables for two treatments.

You can if you have count data, you can uh use generalized multi-level model rather than an ordinary multi-level model.

You can also include linear and non nonlinear trends over time at the first level and so on.

So a lot of extensions are possible.

So for instance here yeah this is a model that can be used to model a time trend in the baseline phase, a time trend in the treatment phase and and yeah in this model we have two effect sizes.

In fact, beta 2 here refers to the immediate effect whereas beta 3 refers to the interaction effect.

So the effect of the treatment on the slope over time.

So you can see it's yeah very flexible model.

What about the multi-level meta analysis of effect sizes?

So this is a typical structure for each this is the structure that is assumed when using traditional meta analytic techniques.

So we assume that for each study we have one sample of participants and so for each sample we only have one effect size.

So theta here refers to the population effect size t to an observed effect size and so these observed effect sizes can be assumed independent but sometimes well there can be various reasons why effect sizes might be dependent.

For instance it's possible that there that there are dependencies over studies.

For instance, maybe some studies were done in Belgium, some in Germany, some in the United States and so on.

Suppose that that these are studies done in education, but the educational system is is completely different in the United States compared to Germany.

So, you can expect that the results of studies done within the United States are more similar than uh results of studies done in Germany.

So again there is overlap in information and it's important to take that overlap into account otherwise your type one error rate will be too high.

So we could use a three-level model.

We can extend the two-level model that I showed before by including an additional higher level model.

It's also possible that you have dependencies within studies.

So for instance sometimes you you have studies and within studies several experiments are done and so again it's it can be interesting to study to what extent there are differences between studies but also to study to what extent there are differences within studies between these sub studies or experiments within studies.

And in the next step we can try to explain this variation by including study characteristics or by including characteristics of these sub studies.

For instance, what sub population was studied in this sub study or what variation of treatment was evaluated and so on.

This is a model we again we can use a tree level model.

So we have at the first level we have our sample level.

So the with the sampling variance at the second level we have uh the level of sub studies with variation between possibly variation between sub studies and at the third level we have the studies.

This is the model we used um for a meta analysis on priming effect studies and we found that in a lot of studies several experiments were done.

Typically these experiments were replicated in different groups but with a slight variation in in the way uh the treatment was operationalized.

Yeah.

And so by by calculating a simple average within each study you would lose that information.

Yeah.

Whereas when using a tree level analysis, you still keep that variation between substudies within studies and you can try to explain this variation by looking at uh for instance the time that the prime was offered.

Does it make uh does it have an influence on the size of the effect?

So in the first step we did random effects model analysis at the tree level random effects model.

So we found that yeah at the tree levels we had more or less um the same amount of variation and then we did moderator analysis and we found that with only one moderator variable one study characteristic and one um moderator variable at the second level.

So one characteristic of the experiments within studies we could explain a large part of the variation especially the variation at the third level.

So the variation between studies you see that only a small part was left.

So you can you could call this a mixed effects model because it includes uh moderator variables but still accounts for possible remaining unexplained variance at the three levels.

It becomes somewhat more complicated in very common situation where within a study you have one sample but within that sample multiple outcome variables were measured.

And this is more complicated because you have in a typical net analysis we assume that we know the sampling variance but here we do not only have sampling variance we also have sampling covariance.

Suppose that you have two kinds of uh of outcomes. you have depression and anxiety that are two variables that are strongly related.

Suppose that in one specific study uh the effect on both variables is evaluated.

But if in a study by coincidence that effect size for anxiety is relatively low.

Well, you would expect for that study that also the effect size for depression uh will be high.

So you can expect that there is not only sampling variance but also sampling co-variance.

Um well I guess most of you are familiar with the the the formula for calculating the sampling variance.

This is a formula for calculating the uh sampling coariance for standardized mean differences.

And note that the sampling coariance depends on row.

Row is the correlation between the outcome variables.

And this is this is yeah this is a problem.

We typically do not know this correlation and very often this correlation is not reported.

So how can we take that coariance into account in our meta analysis?

Well maybe one solution is to use a tree level model again with a structure I showed before.

So we have studies within studies now we have multiple outcomes and for each outcome we have a sample.

In fact this is not the correct structure here.

I say well we have different outcomes but for each outcome we have one sample so we ignore the sampling coariance if we use this structure in our met analysis.

Yeah but maybe this coariance this dependence is taken into account by saying well yes these two outcomes belong to the same study.

Okay, so that's that's the idea.

This is this is the model we use for instance in met analysis on uh on 39 studies reporting on 584 effect sizes.

In each of these studies, the effect was evaluated of prevention programs uh for child abuse and neglect.

So why do we have that many effect sizes?

This is because child abuse and neglect is very hard to measure. you if you ask to to parents how many times did you beat your children this week of course they will say zero so it's very hard to measure and so there is yeah right you can also not observe it if if uh researchers would make observations at home of course parents will not uh abuse or neglect their children during the observations so that's why in a lot of studies researchers were very creative in finding ways of getting an idea of um yeah whether there is child abuse or neglect.

I saw in some studies they looked at um yeah reports done by teachers or by uh supporting services but also sometimes they looked at the number of visits to emergency rooms or number of visits to a doctor or sometimes they they some even in simply looked at risk factors like the number of friends of the family or the the income of the family or things like that.

Yeah.

And in In some studies we only found one effect size but in one study we found up to 51 effect sizes.

Yeah.

So we had a lot of effect sizes.

We we did a three-level analysis and we found well on average so we calculated standardized mean differences.

So on average we found a relatively small effect but it was clearly significant between parenthesis.

You have the standard error.

Um here you can see the variances between studies between outcomes within studies and this is the median sampling variance.

So in total if you sum these three values you have the total variance.

So you can see that about 11% of the variance.

So this is comparable to to what Mike uh showed.

So the values I squared at the third level or at the second level.

So about 11% of the total variance is variance between studies.

About 33% of the variance was variance between outcomes within studies.

And so of course we we try to explain these var variances by including characteristics for instance the type of indicator variable or that's a variable a moderator variable at the second level or for instance the prevention program that was evaluated and that was a characteristic of the study.

But is this a good idea?

Because I said it's not a it's not a correct model. we ignore the sampling coariance and we hope that it is accounted for by using such a tree level model.

So what we did we we performed several simulation studies for instance here using this this multivariant model.

So we simulated data for two outcome variables that possibly can covary within studies but these two outcome variables possibly can also covary at a second level over studies.

And so we used so we analyzed or we we generated raw data but we calculated effect sizes standardized mean differences and we analyze them using a tree level uh meta analytic model.

So here are some results.

So these are the standard deviations for specific conditions, standard deviations of the mean effect estimate.

And you see that the standard deviation is going up if there is more coariance which is what you would expect.

If there is more coariance that then this means that the outcome variables overlap more.

There is more overlap.

So the estimates are less precise.

They vary much more.

Okay.

So you can see that the standard deviation of the estimates were going up and you see that there is no difference between using a three-level model or a two-level model.

Yeah.

In fact, we found that estimates were almost exactly equal when using the two models.

But here we also looked at the the median or the mean standard error.

And what you can see here if you use a tree level model the standard error is also going up together with the sampling variance.

Note that the standard error of the estimate is an estimate of the standard deviation of the sampling distribution of the mean effect.

Yeah.

So you would expect or you hope that the standard errors are very similar to the standard deviations here.

And this is the case for a three-level model. for a two-level model.

You see the two-level model does not take into account the sampling coarience.

So a traditional model using a traditional model is not a good idea.

Uh the standard remains the same and as a result you can see that the type one error rate is not under control when using a two-level model.

But for a three-level model it is nicely under control.

We test it here with a significance level of 0.05.

A type one erate indeed for a three-level model is 0.05.

So the type one error rate it is under control.

Uh what is also nice is that we now have an estimate of the variance between studies and within studies.

We can also try to explain these two variances.

So I think it it's you can solve interesting questions by using such a tree level model.

Of course the drawback is that it's well it's not that very well known.

Also some software like or CMA does not allow for doing tree level analysis.

We also make some assumptions.

For instance, we implicitly assume that the correlation between each pair of outcomes is the same or we assume that the between study variance is the same for each outcome.

But we also did additional simulation studies varying these variances and and correlations and we found that results are fairly robust.

What are alternatives?

But ignoring the dependence is not a good idea.

As we have seen, type one rate is not under control.

An alternative is randomly choosing one effect size for each study, which was already mentioned this morning by Mike or um it's statistically correct because in this way you only have one effect size per study.

So effect sizes are independent.

But you of course you lose information.

You do not use all effect sizes and moreover you do not get an insight in how many variation is there within studies and can we explain this variation averaging effect sizes within the study same problem.

Um so you lose information.

Moreover, um yeah, if you want to to use the sampling variance as a in your meta analysis, well, the sampling variance of that mean depends also on the correlation between the outcomes.

So again, we have the same problem.

And what is typically done is also sampling variance is averaged within the study.

But that's not a good idea because the more outcomes or the more effect sizes within a study you combine, the more precise the result is.

Yeah.

So you should take that into account in your sampling variants.

The problem is how if you do not know what the correlation is between uh outcomes.

Um it's also possible to perform separate meta analysis for each kind of treatment or indicator.

But of course um again for each of these separate meta analysis you only use part of the data.

So it's not a very efficient way.

Moreover, think about that that example that I gave of child abuse.

In one of the studies you had 51 outcome variables.

So are you going to do 51 meta analysis?

So this is not realistic.

Performing a multivariat meta analysis that's statistically okay.

But again you have some problems often if you want to do a multivariate meta analysis typically you you are also going to use an estimate of the correlation between outcomes which is typically not reported and it's only feasible if you have a limited set of outcome variables.

Again think back of that example of child outcomes.

If you have 51 variables in one study, you cannot expect that that for each pair of outcomes, you have a good estimate of the correlation between these outcomes.

Another alternative is robust variance estimation.

So in fact in in this procedure you are estimating a two-level model.

So a misspecified model in fact but by using robust techniques you make sure that the center is still okay.

And indeed it is it it has been demonstrated well mathematically but also via simulation that it gives correct standard that the results are fine.

Um I think also an advantage of this approach is that you can use standard two-level model which is much better known by a lot of people.

So you will not have such a hard job to explain why you are using three levels.

But I think an disadvantage is that you do not get separate estimates of the variance between studies and variance within studies.

Of course, it's possible related to your remark this morning.

It's possible to extend this even more to to additional levels.

It's possible to do a four or five level analysis for instance.

So here for instance, you have a level of an additional upper level. have the studies and within studies you have a level of substies in principle that's possible but it's not very common another kind of model um that was described by by Ben Fernandez Castellia one of the PhD students in our group is a crossclassified model so here we say well we illustrated is also using a data set on on the loneliness um loneliness outcome from variables.

Um but we had we assumed that we can have variance between studies in the size of the effect.

But there can be also uh variance between the instruments that can be used and this model is more complicated or the structure is more complicated in the sense that it is a non- hierarchal structure.

So instruments are not nested within studies.

So the same instrument can be used in several studies at the same time. studies are not nested within instruments.

So the same study can use multiple instruments like like this study.

Yeah.

So we have a cross classification.

A population effect size is a population effect size for this study when this study uses this instrument.

So there are two effects, two random effects and again we can include characteristics of the instruments or characteristics of the studies.

Very shortly something about the use of multi-level meta analysis.

When is it used?

Well, I did a very quick search in the web of of science using these uh keywords in the topics.

I found 90 studies and what is remarkable is that the first study that I found was from 1996 whereas of course this is this is not a complete overview and there are much more studies but this gives already a quick idea.

So although the fact that um that the use of melting levels for math analysis was already described for instance in the book of crowd bush and brick uh in 1992 you see that it is hardly it was hardly used until the 2010s and and now you can see that it's getting ex yeah much more popular.

So this is a nice finding an interesting finding also number of citations it was these kinds of studies were hardly cited until 2010 in what domains were these studies published well typically in psychology behavioral sciences which is also yeah interesting I don't know how to explain this but it's a finding we also looked at what applied to multi level method analytic papers referred to these three uh papers.

So a paper of of Mike and two papers of our research group on three level or multi-level meta analysis and we found that 104 studies referred to these papers and and per indeed used multi-level models.

Interesting uh an interesting finding was that 99 of these studies used a tree level model with an intermediate level.

So um with a study level at the highest level and then within study level at the second level.

Two of the studies also use a tree level model but with an additional level.

So for instance yeah um so we had the sample level we had papers level and then we had a studies level.

So the same studies was um I think it was also mentioned by you this morning.

So maybe the same data set is used in different papers.

So this is this situation.

So we did not find here a study with countries or research teams at the highest level.

There were only three levels that used the fourle model with samples outcomes studies countries.

Sample outcomes substudy studies or sample subtasks task studies.

Again we found that that most of these studies were in the psychological field.

Well, another um PhD student of our group uh Lala Yangi did a meta did or made a review of meta analysis of single case studies and she found that between 1985 and 2015 178 meta meta analysis were done on single case studies and 22 of these studies used multi-level models.

It was striking that most of these almost all of them were also published after 2011.

So you can see that the use of multi-level models is becoming much more popular.

A few more words if I have the time um on yeah how to present the data or the results.

Well of course if you take into account each individual effect size for within studies you can have a lot of effect sizes.

So how are you going to present this?

Well, this is a way of presenting this.

So here here you have one uh confidence interval for each observed effect size, but it does not give a clear overview.

Moreover, you cannot see what effect sizes are nested in what studies.

Okay, you could of course use different colors, but if you have a lot of studies, then the use of colors or different markers also does not give a good overview.

So now we are exploring ways of uh giving better presentations of the data and this is a possibility.

Um so Ben uh is uh is describing several ways of presenting the data and and so this is one way.

So here we have a dot for each study. effect.

The dot represents the mean effect for that study and around that dot and yeah the the size of the dot represents the weight that is given to that study in the three-level meta analysis and around that dot you have two confidence intervals.

So the the bold confidence interval refers to the precision of that mean of that study.

Okay.

Whereas the the lighter confidence interval refers to the median or um yeah refers to the confidence interval based on the median sampling variance of an individual effect size within that study.

So for instance here if you look at study five you see that the black or the the bold confidence interval is much smaller than uh the light one.

This is because you had a lot of effect sizes.

So therefore the mean effect size is much more precise than an individual effect size.

Whereas for study seven you have one effect size within that study and therefore the two confidence intervals are exactly the same.

So that's one way of presenting.

What can also be interesting is to to make a caterpillar plot.

So of all observed effect sizes individual effect sizes.

So here you can immediately see that the majority of effect sizes are positive.

We have a lot are also zero and some are negative.

It's also possible to make a caterpillar plot over studies or yeah on the on the mean effect sizes for the individual studies.

Uh again using these two kinds of confidence intervals.

So maybe this is also a way of presenting the data.

But as I said, we are simply exploring possibilities.

So if you have better suggestions, um I'm very curious to hear them about funnel plots.

Well, we can use uh we can make a funnel plot for the individual effect sizes, but we can append this information by making a funnel plot with the mean effect sizes for these studies.

So here each dot refers to the mean effect size for one study.

Maybe we can also add the number of observed effect sizes within each study as additional information.

Okay, thank you.

Thank you very much for a very interesting uh talk.

I was wondering I like the pictures that you showed in the end.

So are they did you make a package or R functions that we can use to immediately create those pictures for our own data? >> It's the purpose yes to make our scripts that can be used. uh we will make them available using our website.

Yeah. >> Yeah.

Thanks. >> Thanks.

Is very nice and I'm interested in various combinations.

For example, there are um three level meta analysis crossified with some for some of these meta analysis maybe there are two dependent variables or more.

So do you think it is possible to write some general or easy code let's say our packages for somebody to to analyze because it looks like uh nowadays for each problem we have to write a single our code or to customize to analyze the models.

So I understand you're using SAS right or other packages. >> Yes I'm I'm using mostly SUS.

Yeah. >> And there it's easy to say what what the random effects are. >> Yeah.

Um yeah so so what effects very randomly over what units >> yeah so I'm thinking whether it will be some user friendly either SAS macro or so that they can easily mix and match one one of the issue I always have is they have multiple effect sizes but they have also dependence so there are should be something similar to multi three level meta analysis then uh you always have struggle how to analyze it we all know there are methods But how to implement it is an issue. >> Yes, that's a very good point.

Yeah.

Yeah.

We we are aware of that.

Um we are not really planning to to write an additional package.

Uh but we hope that maybe in existing packages uh extensions can be made to to model this kind of to analyze data using these models.

But we certainly will also make available the codes that we that we use in in SAS or in uh in R.

Yeah, thank you.

Thanks.

Nice presentation.

Um did you did you compare the results of the cross-classified multi-level meta analysis to standard meta analysis and what are the differences?

So what is the benefit of estimating these more complicated models >> comparing the cross type? >> Yeah.

To the standard >> to the standard meta analytics to the standard.

Yes. >> We didn't need we did a simulation study um yeah comparing the results of using this model with a model in which you um include only one type of random effect.

So the random effect for the studies or the random effect of uh of the instruments.

We also compared it uh to the analysis of the data using a tree level model where you have um or sorry no um well a tree level model but with um sorry I have to I have to think um we had random effects within studies so it was not exactly the same structure as I showed here.

So we had within studies we had two kinds of random effects in our simulation study and we also analyzed the data using a tree level model in which we looked at can we solve this by taking a combination of these two cross uh cross factors.

And so we found that the yeah that the best solution or the best performance was for the model that indeed took into account the cross classification structure.

And so the results are as expected um from other simulation studies that the type one error rate was not under control when using other models.

Thank you for the great talk.

Um I was wondering can you say something about the minimum number of sampling units that is needed on level two and level three because um sometimes we have meta analysis with um a relatively low number of studies or if you want to compare countries you only have a low number of countries >> and um how important is it that you get a certain minimum amount or if you're under the minimum level is that a huge problem? >> Yeah, thank you.

That's a that's of course a very important question and uh it is an issue.

It is sometimes an issue.

Um so first of all for the fixed effect estimates it does not matter.

I mean we we found in a lot of simulation studies that fixed effects are well estimated in even if you have small numbers of units even if the model is not correct like like in simulation study I showed before whether you use a two-level model or a three-level model fixed effects estimates are almost identical so that's not a problem but for the standard errors it's important that you use the correct model and uh you should indeed have enough units at least at the highest level.

So it's not a problem if within studies for instance you only have for some studies one effect size for other studies two or three effect sizes.

That's fine.

It's especially important that at the highest level you have enough units.

And what is enough?

Well yeah in multi level analysis in general sometimes uh as a rule of thumb um they say you need at least 20 or 30 units.

Now we have done a lot of simia studies and sometimes we found that with much smaller numbers of units you still get uh correct results type one rate is still under control at least if you do not have in uh moderator variables in your model if you simply estimate the mean effect.

So sometimes with 10 or even with five studies you get reasonable good estimates of the center and therefore correct uh coverage proportions of confidence intervals and so on.

Of course if you want to to study moderator effects and also if you want to uh to make inferences on the variances then you need more um more studies.

So for instance in a simulation study of Antonio Lopez Lopez from the University of Morsia um well he found that if you want to include moderators at the third level so at the study level you need at least 20 studies.

Um otherwise your type one rate is too high.

By the way, when you use the RVE approach of the robust variance estimate estimation procedure, um, type one is still under control if you use somewhat smaller numbers, although the procedure is somewhat conservative.

Okay.

Yeah.

Maybe one additional remark.

Of course, there is also the issue of power.

So even if with five studies or with 10 studies, results might be okay. the power will be very low. >> I think you is very interesting.

I think there are a lot of um possible examples where you could imagine this would be useful.

So I was thinking of um for example also subgroup analysis and meta analysis.

So you have subgroups within the studies and you um you mentioned this right is you could say that within the same sample they have um shared variance.

Um, so do you have some rule of thumb maybe um like there's out there for other types of analysis um when to include a level in your analysis?

Maybe compare it and then or leave it out to simplify it a little. >> Yes, that's a hard question but of course again yeah a very interesting and important question.

So what I didn't really mention is that implicitly we assume when we use random effects we assume that the units that we have are random sample out of an infinite population.

So for instance I I give the example of instruments.

So yeah this was also a remark we got from a reviewer.

Yeah there are not an infinite number of instruments available to measure loneliness.

So that's that that's that's one issue.

So do you want to say something about individual instruments and then it's not a good idea to use a level or or use random effects for the instrument?

Then you can include the instrument in your analysis as a moderator.

You can use dummy variables for the different instruments and then you get an estimate for each instrument.

You can so so that's that's one thing.

Second thing is yeah if if you want to generalize to instruments in general what are instruments in general can we assume that there is such a population of instruments and also we make the assumption that these random effects are normally distributed.

So why is it reasonable to assume that these random effects are normally distributed over instruments?

So does it mean you would say that to purely think theoretical and not look at how much variance is explained on that level at all? >> Okay.

Uh yeah.

So that's that's indeed another issue.

So yeah, sometimes it's it's from a theoretical point of view it can be can be a good idea to use a four or fifth level.

Um but it's possible that the variance at an additional level may be very small.

And so in that situation it's not such a a problem if you ignore that level.

Yeah.

The results will be very similar.

And that makes also that it's easier to interpret your data that it's easier to communicate about your results.

So it's always yeah trade-off.

How complicated do I want to make this model?

You also do not want to uh to oversp specify your model.

You also do not want to to catch the pecularities, the random errors in your data set.

So it's yeah finding a matter of finding a balance of yeah estimating a reasonable realistic model on one hand but not making it too complex on the other hand.

Thank you.

======================================================================
Meta Analysis 11 RVE
======================================================================

In this video, we will look at use of RVE or robust variance estimation for the meta analysis of dependent effect sizes.

A short recap, we have seen that a traditional fixed effect model or a random effects model assume that effect sizes are independent.

This is a reasonable assumption when studies are done by separate groups and each study reports only one effect size.

Yet very often there are different sources of dependence.

You can have dependence across studies.

For instance, when multiple studies are done by the same research group.

In that case, effect sizes from the same research group are likely more similar than effect sizes from different research groups because a research group may have operationalized the variables in a very specific way.

Sampled study group participants from a similar population and so on.

Another situation is where studies are reporting more than one effect size. for instance, when they evaluate the effect at multiple time points for multiple outcome variables or when some variations of treatments are evaluated.

In these scenarios, multi-level models may be helpful.

An ordinary random effects model can be considered as a two-level model with systematic variation between studies and sampling variance within studies.

To account for dependencies, one could define additional levels, upper or intermediate levels.

For instance, to account for the similarity of studies from the same country, we could define an upper country level.

Whereas to account for the similarity of results from multiple substudies, we define an intermediate substudy level.

In other words, instead of assuming that observed effect sizes vary because of sampling variance and systematic between study variance alone, we now say that on top of the sampling variance, there can be multiple kinds of systematic variance.

For instance, variance between countries, variance between studies from the same country, variance between substudies from the same study.

To that end, we use a metalytic model with a random country effect, random study effect, and a random substy.

Other more complex models are possible as well.

For instance, think about a scenario where studies may report multiple effect sizes and when the same instrument may be used in multiple studies.

In this situation, instruments are not nested within studies because the same instrument is used in multiple studies.

But the other way around, studies are also not nested within instruments because the same study may use multiple instruments.

Again we can use random effects to model the effect of the studies and the effect of instruments.

But now these random effects are not nested or hierarchally structured but rather cross-classified.

Another common situation is where in one study multiple effect sizes are calculated on the same sample of participants.

You remember that the sampling variance is typically estimated before doing a map analysis and therefore is considered as known during the meta analysis.

But in a situation where you have multiple effect sizes calculated for the same sample, there's not only sampling variance but also sampling co-variance.

For instance, for two standardized mean differences calculated in the same study for two different outcomes but based on the same sample, we have a co-variance that can be calculated with this formula.

You see the parameter row in this formula which refers to the correlation between the two outcome variables.

A positive correlation between the outcomes will also result in a positive correlation between the effect sizes.

So if two outcomes correlate positively and by coincidence you have thrown a sample for which the standardized mean difference for one outcome is relatively high.

You can expect that the other effect size will be relatively high as well.

After calculating the sampling variance and co-variance, you can then perform a multivariant meta analysis treating the sampling variance and coariance as known.

An issue, however, is that the row is unknown and that often studies do not report an estimate of this correlation.

Therefore, we could use a reasonable guess for row and then try out other values to investigate whether the conclusions of our meta analysis are sensitive to the value chosen.

As an alternative, we can use the following trick.

We can treat the effect sizes from the same sample within a study as if they are based on separate samples but for different substies within that study.

The advantage is that we do not need to estimate the sampling coariance.

The association between effect sizes from the same study is accounted for by modeling the effect sizes as nested within studies.

In some simulation studies, we have shown that this trick seems to work relatively well.

The multi-level modeling framework is a very flexible and helpful framework.

Yet, a drawback is that we make several assumptions that may be wrong.

First assumption is that the model is correctly specified.

For instance, we have to define what the different levels are.

Can use a threele model, but maybe sometimes a four or five level model is more appropriate.

Note that when we use a trick of considering effect sizes coming from the same sample as effect sizes coming from separate samples from the same study, our model is not correctly specified.

Related to this, we need a sufficient number of units to be able to estimate the variance of an additional random effect.

For instance, if you would have data from two countries only from two countries, you cannot estimate the between country variance and hence it does not make sense to include a random country effect.

Or if you would have data from 10 studies coming from 12 countries in total, it is hard to disentangle the country effect and the study effect.

So again it does not make sense to include that country level and suppose you have 10 studies from the US and 10 other studies each coming from another country.

In that situation it is possible to estimate the variance between countries and the variance between studies within countries.

But here the between study estimate would be based only on the variation between studies within the US whereas in other countries this variance may be substantially different.

Another assumption is that at each level we make the assumption that residuals or random effects are independent and normally distributed. assumptions that may also be violated.

Another issue is that the sampling variance may be incorrectly estimated.

For instance, the sampling variance of a standardized difference between the mean pre-est score versus the mean post- test score depends on the correlation between the pre and post test post- test scores.

Unfortunately, often studies that use such a design do not report that correlation and hence we have to make a guess of that correlation in order to estimate the sampling variance.

Often a correlation of 50 is used but this may be wrong and therefore the sampling variance estimate of the observed effect size may be wrong.

As a consequence, the weights that are used may not be perfectly inverse variance weights.

Moreover, standard errors obtained for the model parameters may be wrong and hence confidence intervals and hypothesis tests that make use of these standard errors may be invalid. as a safety net, we could make use of robust variance estimation or RVE.

The idea is that instead of estimating standard errors as a function of the random variances in our model, you base the standard errors of the observed variance.

You base the standard errors on the observed variance in effect sizes.

In that way, the standard errors do not depend anymore on the model itself, making them robust for misspecification of the model.

Because the standard errors are not model based based on the data, they are also called empirical standard errors.

They're also called Uberwide standard errors and the estimation is also called cluster robust variance estimation within our situation.

The studies in which there may be multiple effect sizes being the clusters.

More specifically, in the case of meta analysis, we define observed residuals as the deviation of the I observed effect size T in study J from the overall effect size data.

Instead of assuming that the variance in observed effect sizes is the sum of the systematic variance between studies, systematic variance between sub studies and the sampling variance.

We now estimate the variance and coariances.

The estimated variance of the observed effect sizes is the observed variance in the residuals.

Co-variance between effect sizes from the same study is estimated by calculating the coariance in the residuals from the same study.

The coariance between effects from different studies is assumed to be zero.

The great thing about RVE is that the standard errors are now fine even if the model is not correctly specific.

For instance, when you use a random effects model that does not explicitly model the dependence of effect sizes that come from the same study.

Moreover, RVE does not make the assumption of normality anymore.

We can also use it when observed effect sizes are not weighted according their uh precision.

Yet using RVE also has its limitations.

For instance, when you have sub studies within studies that use a two-level model rather than a three-level model, the standard errors you will obtain for the overall effect is fine, but you will not get separate variance estimates for the variance between studies and the variance between substies.

Moreover, if the model is not correct, observed effect sizes may not be optimally weighted and hence the metalic results may be less precise.

Therefore, an optimal solution seems to be to use a model that is as good as possible, but combine this model with RVE as a stafnet for a possible misspecification of the model.

Pistski and Typton proposed three kinds of models to be used in combination with RVE.

The first model is a hierarchal effects model which in fact which is in fact the multilevel model for instance to be used when within studies you have multiple substudies with different samples.

The second model is a correlated effects model which is a multivariate model to be used when within studies multiple effect sizes are calculated for the same sample.

The hierarchal and correlated effects model combines both models.

To illustrate the approach, look at the example of a very recent meta analysis in which I was involved.

In this meta analysis, we studied among other things the association between the perception of one group that another group of persons persons is not really human on one side and the willingness to use violence against that other group on the other side.

In this meta analysis, we combined data from multiple projects.

Each project project one or more studies were done and in each study one or more samples were investigated and for each sample one or more effects were studied.

Therefore by using the trick of considering different samples as independent samples from multiple substies we would have five levels.

Yet using the hierarchal and correlated effects model, we would have four levels.

Here the results.

I first fitted a traditional random effects model.

This is a twolevel model because this model does not account for the dependence between effect sizes.

So does not account for the overlap in information given by effect sizes from the same sample, study or project.

The standard error is probably underestimated and therefore the confidence interval around the overall association is too small.

The confidence interval is too optimistic.

We see indeed that when using RVE for the same model, the standard error is considerably larger and so the confidence interval is also larger.

Let's look at results when using a hierarchal 51 or a multivariat model with a guest row of.5 or8.

Interestingly, for these three models, we get very similar results.

Using RVE on top of these models slightly increases the confidence interval width, but that the results are dead very similar for these three kinds of models with or without using RVE increases our confidence in these results.

To be honest, I do not have an explanation why the confidence interval when using RVE in combination with a two-level model is smaller than the confidence interval when using the multi-level or multivariate model.

I think it would be interesting to do a simulation study to compare systematically these different approaches.

To conclude, I recommend using an appropriate model combined with RVE.

In this way, you combine the advantages of both approaches.

By using RVE, the type one error rate is under control.

By using an appropriate model, you get information on the different population variance parameters and studies will be appropriately weighted.

A drawback of this approach is of course its complexity.

======================================================================
Meta Analysis 12 Applications and extensions SCED meta analysis mp4
======================================================================

applications and extensions.

A first application is discussed in another PowerPoint presentation.

Here I would like to focus on a second application of meta analysis, the meta analysis of single case experimental studies.

Marion and others investigated whether they could stimulate the response behavior of students by working with response cards.

Current practice is that students raise their hand after the teacher asks a question and that only one or maximally two or three students get a chance to give an answer by working with response cards.

So these are cards on which students can write their answer.

In principle, all students can formulate an answer.

Here you see the results for one student, a student from the fourth year of primary education as presented by the researchers.

Let us look at the black dots.

In several time intervals, it was counted how many times the student gave an answer.

Observations were done during four phases.

The first phase is a baseline phase in which the traditional approach was used.

In the second phase, a treatment phase, response cards were used.

The third phase is again a baseline phase, so without response cards.

Whereas the fourth the final phase is again a response card phase.

So on the xaxis you see the sessions the time intervals on the yaxis you see the number of academic responses.

This design is called an abab design.

You can see that in the A phases, so the baseline phases with a traditional approach, the student regularly raised his hand but could not often give an answer.

Whereas in the B phases, the student more frequently formulated an answer.

The graph suggests that there is indeed an effect of using response cards on the number of responses given.

But you may wonder whether the effect we observed is statistically significant.

Moreover, we could be interested in an estimate of the size of the effect.

In single case studies, not often effect sizes are calculated.

It is even not common practice to perform statistical significance tests.

So that typically no test statistics are available that could be used to calculate effect sizes.

Instead, results are often presented in a graph like the one I showed earlier.

Yet, this tradition means an advantage for the meta analyst since it becomes possible to retrieve the raw data, which is usually not the case for group comparison studies.

One way to get insight in the size and significance of the effect is to use a regression analysis.

Response variable for the student is described using a regression equation with one predictor, more specifically a treatment dummy indicator with value zero for the baseline faces and one for the treatment phases.

For the baseline phases, the treatment variable is equal to zero and therefore the expected number of answers equals beta 0.

In the response card condition, the treatment variable is equal to one and therefore the expected number of answers equals beta 0 plus beta 1.

Beta 1 therefore indicates how much the expected number of answers increases or decreases if response cards are used.

Beta 1 therefore can be regarded as a measure of the effect in our regression analysis.

We therefore can estimate and test the size of the effect of the treatment.

The model is a peace-wise regression model.

Between phases, the regression line is interrupted.

In baseline conditions, the curve is a horizontal line with beta 0 as hat.

In the response card condition, this is a line with beta 0 plus beta 1 as eight.

To express the size of the effect, we could therefore use the regression coefficient beta one.

A problem of this measure, however, is that it depends on the scale that is used.

If for instance intervals are made 10 times as large, the expected means in both phases will be 10 times as large.

And also the coefficient beta 1 will be 10 times larger.

Therefore, it may be a good idea to standardize the measure.

For instance, by dividing the mean difference by the within phase standard deviation.

It is also possible to divide scores directly by the root of the pulled uh variance.

This standardized mean difference can be estimated by dividing the difference in the observed phase means by the square root of the pulled within phase variance.

This measure is very similar to the standardized mean difference used in group comparison studies.

Note that the serious drawback of a single case study is that it gives primarily information about one single case, but it that it does not give a lot of information about the population of cases.

While this could be especially interesting for most of us, an obvious solution to this problem is a replication of the study.

This may be a direct replication.

This is a replication of the study in exactly the same conditions only with another subject.

But it's also possible to do a systematic replication.

This is a replication of the study but varying one or more characteristics of for instance the treatment to look for factors that may moderate the treatment effect.

Sometimes the experiment is replicated in the study itself. for instance using a multiple baseline design or it is replicated in another study.

This raises the question of how to combined results of several cases in a quantitative way in the experiment of Narion.

In total, six subjects participated.

We could perform a peace-wise regression analysis for each of these subjects.

You can see that the pattern is very similar for all subjects, but not equal.

If you compare, for instance, student one with student five, you can see that the first student gives less answers in the baseline phase, but more in response card condition.

Beta zero of student one therefore is smaller but but beta one or the effect is larger.

We could summarize the regression equations of all students in one single equation by adding an index J for the case.

The expected number of responses for student J on moment I equals the beta zero of that student J plus if the observation at moment I falls in the response card condition the beta 1 of that student.

The index J therefore indicates that both the baseline and the effect size can vary over cases.

This variation over students can be described using additional regression equations.

For instance, simple equations with only an intercept and a student specific residual.

Gamma 0 therefore refers to the average level of performance during the baseline phases over all cases.

Whereas gamma 1 0 is the size of the mean effect over all cases.

The variances of U0 and U1 indicate the between student variance in initial level and in the effect respectively.

You recognize in this model a multi-level model.

A multi-level model consists of regression equations at several levels typically assuming a normal distribution for the residuals at each of the levels.

The parameters that are estimated in a multi-level model in a multi-level anal an analysis are the regression coefficients at the highest level as well as the variances and co-variances of the residuals at each of the levels.

We used the restricted maximum likelihood procedure implemented in susprom mixed to estimate the parameters of the model.

Here are the results.

You can see that the mean baseline level equals about one.

Which means that in a baseline condition, students answered on average about one time per interval.

In the response card condition, the mean number of answers per interval is about 14 points higher.

Between parenthesis, you can see the standard error of the estimate.

Note that the ratio of the estimate over the standard error is approximately standard normally distributed.

Therefore, we can see that the effect of using response cards is statistically significant for commonly used significance levels.

Further, you can see that there are no differences between students in the baseline level, but that there is a tendency that the effect varies over students.

Comparing the ratio of estimates over the standard error to a standard normal distribution, you can see that this tendency is statistically not significant at the 0.05 significance level.

Also, when using a more appropriate likelihood tracio test, this variance appears to be statistically nonsignificant.

Finally, you can see that the response behavior clearly varies more over time intervals within a student than over students.

We want to note that the number of cases in fact is too low to perform a multi-level analysis and especially to have powerful statistical tests.

But the example was used for illustrative purposes.

A second example, Shogran and colleagues did a meta analysis on 13 single case studies including in total 30 cases.

Investigating whether giving the pro possibility to make choices in their tasks or in the order of the tasks can reduce the amount of problem behavior in the classroom.

The authors used relatively simple metalytic procedures.

For instance, by calculating means of a simple effect size measure, we did replicate the meta analysis using a multi-level model.

Since in most of the studies more than one case was investigated, we used a three-level model.

At the first level, the variation within case J over of study K over measurement occasions is described.

The amount of problem behavior was requested on a dummy variable indicating whether on moment I the child was given the choice between several tasks or not.

Both the expected amount in the baseline condition as the expected effect of being given the choice is allowed to vary.

You can see that beta 1 jk varies over cases around a mean effect for study k.

This is theta 10 k and that the study specific effects vary around an overall treatment effect gamma 10.

Note that there were differences between studies in the scales.

Therefore, we first performed a separate regression analysis for each case and calculated the root mean squared error.

So, it's a standard deviation of the residual of the first level equation.

Next, we divided the scores for each case by this root mean square error.

Here you can see the results of the multi-level analysis.

You can see that under the baseline condition, the expected amount of problem behavior was about three standard deviations above zero.

In the treatment condition, so when the child was given the choice, the amount of problem behavior was 1.84 standard deviations smaller, a mean effect that is statistically significant. standard the parameter estimate divided by the standard error of 46 gives a ZV value of four corresponding to a very small p value when comparing this value to a standard normal distribution.

You can see that there is no significant variation between studies in both the baseline performance and in the effect, but that there are substantial differences between cases at level two.

To explain differences between cases and studies, characteristics of the cases or characteristics of the studies can be included in the equations describing the variation over groups.

If you would substitute beta 1 jk from the level one equation by the level two equation, you could see that theta 111 is a coefficient of an interaction term interaction term of the case characteristic set and the choice dummy variable.

In other words, if data 1 one is different from zero, this means that the size of the effect depends on Z and therefore Z is a moderator variable.

Similarly, gamma 101 refers to the moderator effect of a stud characteristic W.

To illustrate the exploration of possible moderating effects, we included a case characteristic, more specifically gender, and a study characteristic, more specifically, whether the student could choose the task or merely the order of the tasks.

You can see that the interaction of both characteristics with a choice variable was statistically not significant indicating the effect of having choice on problem behavior does not depend on these case and study characteristics.

Note that beta 1 again can be regarded as an effect effect size measure since we already standardized the response variable.

Beta 1 is already a standardized mean difference.

Sometimes it may be difficult to retrieve all raw data.

While it still might be possible to calculate a standardized mean difference as an alternative to the analysis of the raw data, we could also first calculate a standardized mean difference for each case and combine this with a tree level model.

The first level equation now becomes the following.

The observed effect size G equals the population effect size beta 1 plus random residual.

At the second and the third level, the equations for the variation of the effect over cases or over studies remain the same, but the equations for describing the variation of the baseline performance are dropped because they are not of importance anymore.

In the left column, you can see the results of the analysis on road data for the model we discussed before.

In the right column, you can see the results for the analysis of the effect size measures.

You can see that the estimates are very similar and that the conclusions are the same.

This analysis illustrates that we do not need draw data.

Combining effect sizes gives the same results.

If you would have very large data sets, analyzing effect sizes can go faster and there may be a higher probability that the estimation procedure converges.

But combining draw data on the other hand has the advantage that it is possible to adapt the first level equation for instance to include additional level one variables.

The flexibility of the multi-level model allows for several extensions.

First extension is to allow for more complex variance uh coariance structures at one of the levels.

For instance, it may be a too strong assumption to assume that scores from a case are independent from each other.

And it may be more prudent to allow for a possible outcreoration.

To take into account that measurements that are close to each other in time are more similar than measurements that are farther apart in time.

Secondly, other coariantss can be included also at the first level.

For instance, an additional dummy variable at the first level to compare a second treatment with the baseline.

Thirdly, linear trends can be taken into account by including a time variable t in the first level model with a main effect and an interaction effect with a treatment dummy called D in this equation.

The interpretation of this equation becomes more clear when we restructure the terms.

Intercept of the equation is equal to beta 1 and beta 0 plus beta 1 times the treatment dummy variable D.

In the baseline phase, the treatment dummy variable is equal to zero.

So the intercept is equal to beta 0.

In the treatment phase, the intercept is equal to beta 0 plus beta 1.

Note that the intercept is the expected value at time zero.

By centering the time variable around the value at the end of the baseline phase, beta 0 can be interpreted as a level of the outcome at the end of the baseline phase.

Beta 1 can be interpreted as the immediate effect of the treatment.

Similarly, the trend over time is equal to beta 2 in the baseline phase and beta 2 plus beta 3 in the treatment phase.

Beta 3 therefore can be interpreted as the difference between the slope in the treatment condition and the slope in the baseline condition.

Note that now we have two effect sizes for each case.

Beta one which expresses the size of the effect on or the immediate treatment effect the effect on the level and beta 3 which expresses the effect on the slope respectively.

======================================================================
Meta Analysis 13 Applications and extensions Intro to Network Meta analysis
======================================================================

When we talked about meta analysis of standardized mean differences, we assumed that all studies in our meta analysis are comparing one treatment with control condition.

Although it is possible that there are small differences between studies in the treatment and you can include treatment characteristics as moderator variables in your analysis.

We still assumed that there is one general type of treatment that is uh evaluated in all of the studies.

Sometimes however the same problem can be treated in multiple ways.

For instance, in the study of Linda, they distinguished 23 approaches to treat depression and different studies can study or can evaluate different treatments.

It is even possible that within the same study different treatments are evaluated.

It is also possible that in some studies a treatment is not immediately compared with a control condition but that rather treatments are directly compared to each other.

In the study of Linda, they collected the data of a lot of studies and um you can see in the plot on the left side of the of the slide that uh the nodes refer to the 20 23 treatments of depression and you can see that some of these nodes are connected.

This means that these um nodes or these treatments are directly compared.

The thicker the connection, the more that connection has been studied.

So you see that some of the treatments were uh immediately or were directly compared to each other.

But uh most of the treatments are compared to placebo condition or a usual care uh condition.

Note that not all treatments are immediately compared to each other.

It is indeed very often the case that um studies compare a treatment with a control condition or a placebo condition.

And this can make that if we make a similar plot which is called a network graph that we get a pattern like the right hand side uh graph which is called a starshaped network graph.

In this graph you can see that there are multiple treatments but all of these treatments are compared to one control condition only.

So the treatments are never compared directly with each other.

These types of data can be combined in a network meta analysis.

So in a network meta analysis we can combine the results of multiple studies that not necessarily uh studied the same treatment.

So in total multiple treatments are analyzed possibly um within a primary study also multiple treatments can be studied. interesting in section network meta analysis is that based on the results we can rank the treatments from more effective to less effective.

And so in that way we can compare treatments even if these treatments were not or were never uh studied uh or compared directly in primary studies.

So if you have a starshaped uh network plot even in that situation you can rank as um treatments from less to more effective.

How does it work?

Well suppose that in one study treatment A has been compared to treatment B and suppose the standardized mean difference is 04.

So this means that treatment A looks more effective than treatment B.

In another study, treatment B was compared to treatment C and the observed standardized mean difference was uh 0.3 which means that treatment B was found more effective than treatment C.

So the uh the network graph would look like this.

So you have a treatment B that has been compared to treatment A as well as to treatment C.

But A and C never have has been or have been compared directly.

But still if you know that treatment A was more effective than treatment B and B is more effective than treatment C then you can assume that treatment A will be more effective than treatment C.

So the difference between A and B is 0.4.

A is more effective than B.

The standardized mean difference is 04.

Standardized mean difference between uh treatment C and B is.3.

So that means that the difference between C and A is.7 or the estimated difference between C and A is.7.

So the difference between the means standardized by standard deviation is equal to.7.

So you see that although uh treatment A and C never has been studied or compared directly based on the results of these studies, we can give an estimate of the standardized mean difference or the the treatment effectiveness.

Um we can compare the treatment effectiveness of both treatments.

Um at least of course we have to make an assumption. we make the assumption of transitivity.

So that if A is more effective than B, B is more effective than C, then we conclude that A is also more effective than C.

And more specifically, the standardized mean difference between A and C is equal to the standardized mean difference between A and B plus the standardized mean difference between B and C.

If we have two independent studies, so then the observed effect sizes are also independent of each other.

And therefore the variance of the sum of the two standardized mean differences is equal to the sum of the two variances.

We have seen how we can calculate the the sampling variance of a standardized mean difference.

So based on that formula we can also calculate the variance of the sum of these two observed effect sizes.

But sometimes there are also studies available that directly compare treatment A and C.

And so now we have a closed um closed loop.

So A is connected to B, B with C, but also A is connected with C.

In this situation, we have two kinds of evidence.

We have the indirect comparison of A and C uh by combining the results of study one and two.

But we have also direct evidence uh by looking at results of study three.

And so in the network meta analysis we can combine the two types of evidence direct and indirect evidence. if we would only look direct evidence to say something about uh A versus C, then we could use only the data from study three.

If we also use the indirect evidence, then we also use data or evidence from study one and study two.

So, by combining the direct and the indirect evidence, we use more data.

As a result, the precision of the estimate of the effect or the difference between A and C will be higher.

So the standard error will be smaller.

So the confidence interval will be smaller and the statistical power will be higher.

A second advantage of using indirect evidence as well is that in this way we can also compare treatments that have not been compared before in a direct way.

So look again at the graph uh on this plot on on this slide.

You can see that yeah a lot of treatments have been compared to a no treatment condition or to an alarm condition but uh now not a lot of pairs of treatments have been compared directly.

So if you want to say something about whether psychological therapy or the use of uh the medication immina, which of the two treatments of um noctural and uras is more effective?

We only can use indirect evidence now.

So if we have an open network like in the plot here, we can use the results of a meta analysis on AB studies and a meta analysis of BC studies to obtain an indirect evidence of A versus C.

Sometimes we have closed networks.

So we do not have only indirect evidence but we also have direct evidence.

So we can calculate a weighted average of the indirect estimate from um yeah comparing the results of the uh meta analysis of AB studies and the meta analysis of BC studies.

We can compare or we can combine that uh result with direct estimates from a meta analysis of the AC studies.

So in that way we get an estimate that is a mix of an in of indirect and direct evidence and therefore we also talk about a mixed estimate.

Note that in the two cases we make the assumption of transitivity.

Without that assumption of transitivity, we cannot uh obtain an indirect estimate and therefore also not a mixed estimate.

But does it make sense this transitivity assumption?

Well, the answer is sometimes it does.

In other situations it does not.

Look at this situation or this example.

Suppose in one specific study a BMW was found to be much faster than the Range Rover.

In a second study it was found that the Range Rover is much faster than a Porsche.

So can you then conclude that the BMW is faster than a Porsche?

Well, I guess you can see that this is that this does not make sense.

The issue is here that in the first study a very old Range Rover was used.

So of course the BMW is much faster than that that Range Rover.

In the second study in which the Range Rover was the winner, the Range Rover was a very new Range Rover and moreover it was tested in very muddy conditions in conditions in which a Porsche is not expected to perform well.

So of course the Range Rover will win in that situation.

So you can see that the it's it's yeah the Range Rover in the first study was completely different Range Rover than Range Rover in the second study and it was also tested in completely different conditions.

So therefore we cannot use a transitivity assumption.

We cannot predict that indeed a BMW will be much faster than a Porsche on a highway for instance.

So this transitivity assumption assumes that treatment B is doing equally good in the AB comparison studies compared to the BC comparison studies which is definitely not the case in the example on the previous slide.

So, the Range Rover was not doing equally good when being compared to the the Porsche than when being compared to the BMW because it was an older um or or in comparison with the Porsche.

It was a newer version of Range Rover and it was tested in a condition for which a Range Rover was made.

So in general we can uh think about effect modifiers that are all kinds of characteristics of studies that can have an influence on the performance of a specific treatment.

So for instance participant characteristics, study characteristics, treatment characteristics um and so on.

And so the assumption underlying the transitivity assumption is that these effect modifiers are distributed similarly in studies in which A is compared to B compared to studies in which B is compared to C.

So I think the the example of the cars is straightforward but this can also happen in meta analysis of drugs for instance.

So there would be a problem if a new drug um is studied in studies uh with patients for which we know that the traditional treatments uh will probably not work.

So if that new drug is used on patients for which we know okay there is no other choice that the traditional treatment work does not work so let's try out a new drug and if in other studies the traditional treatment is compared to uh another drug but in these other studies traditional treatments are also applied on patients for which possibly these traditional treatments work.

So in that situation, comparing the new drug with um the other drug will not be a fair comparison because the transitivity assumption cannot be made or I mean an indirect comparison of the new drug and the other drug is not fair.

An issue is that that assumption of transitivity cannot be tested statistically.

But what we can do is we can ask experts to have a look at the different studies and to evaluate whether these potential effect modifiers are indeed equally distributed across these different designs or across these different types of studies. studies comparing A with B and studies comparing B with C.

So the idea is that these studies should be comparable so that we can expect that treatment B will perform equally good in the first type of studies compared to the second type type of studies.

The violation of the transitivity assumption can however lead to inconsistencies in the data.

I mean if you have a closed loop so not uh in the graph that I show here here we do not have a closed loop.

So A is compared with B b with C but A and C are not directly compared.

So we can uh get an estimate an indirect estimate of the effect uh of A versus C but there is no other evidence.

So there cannot be inconsistencies in the data.

But suppose we have a closed loop like here.

Then we can uh get an indirect estimate of the effect of a versus c.

And we can compare that indirect uh evidence with direct evidence of um a versus c.

And so we can look at whether these two estimates are in line with each other.

This is also the case in this graph.

So A and C can be compared indirectly via B but they can also be compared indirectly via D.

So we have two different uh ways in which we can um estimate an indirect um treatment effect or we can indirectly estimate the treatment effect of A versus C.

And we can compare these two indirect estimates.

So if there would be a violation of the assumption of transitivity then it is possible that this is shown in inconsistencies in the data.

So that the different estimates of the treatment effect of A versus C are not in line with each other.

And we can also test these inconsistencies.

So what is an inconsistency?

Well, here we have an example where we have three studies.

A is compared with B, B with C leading to an indirect uh treatment effect estimate of 7 and suppose that in study three uh ASC are compared directly and an observed effect size of.9 was found.

So we have a direct estimate and an indirect estimate and we can compare the two.

So we can evaluate whether these are more or less in line with each other.

Of course you can see here that these two values are not exactly the same.

This does not necessarily mean that there is inconsistency that the transitivity assumption is not correct.

We know that there is always uh yeah sampling variation within studies.

So the result that we obtain the observed effect size we obtain in a specific study is not necessarily exactly equal to the population effect size.

There's the issue of sampling variation that we have seen before.

So that can be an explanation why the 0.9 and 7 are not exactly the same.

Another explanation is that different studies they um often differ in a lot of aspects and so there is heterogeneity between studies in in uh in how studies are set up and so on.

And also these effects or this heterogeneity can possibly explain why.

So again by coincidence in study three a slightly different estimate was obtained than uh the indirect estimate.

A third reason is of course that there is real inconsistency that in studies in which A is compared to C that in these kinds of studies while conditions are different compared to conditions in which A is compared to B or B is compared to C and that this makes that transitivity assumption does not make sense and that Um yeah there are systematic differences between the direct and the indirect um estimates.

There can also be inconsistencies when we have multiple indirect estimates.

So here for instance stud three and four are comparing a with b d and d with c.

So based on that information we can get an indirect estimate of a versus c.

So how can you check transitivity or consistency?

Well, a first way is to check the distribution of the effect modifiers over types of studies.

So we want to know whether in general when BMWs and um Range Rovers are compared to each other, the conditions are different than when Range Rovers are compared with Porsches.

We can also test an inconsistency factor.

So we can uh test the difference between a direct and an indirect estimate.

So this was proposed by Bher.

The glazer and approach is somewhat more complex.

So it can be used to test consistency when you have multiple estimates.

So it's possible that for instance you have one direct estimate and two indirect estimates.

But it's also possible to estimate and test uh model inconsistency in general across all types of um yeah across all pairs of treatments.

For instance, look at the model of lumly.

So a model that can be used if you have um standardized mean differences that's the dependent variable.

So the dependent variable is the the mean difference standardized mean difference um when treatment I is compared with treatment J in study K.

Well, this mean difference is defined to be equal to a difference between the mean the expected value for treatment I minus the expected value for treatment J plus random deviation that is due to study heterogeneity and that can have an effect on um yeah the mean that is um the the the mean for treatment I in that study K or the mean the population the expected value um for treatment J in study K and then and this is important there is an additional term which is a kind of interaction term for modeling the inconsistency so it is the additional effect on the standardized mean difference when treatment I is compared to treatment J and then you have random deviation uh due to sampling variance.

So in this way by estimating uh the variance of that um interaction term we well if there would be no inconsistency then that variance of that interaction term would be equal to zero.

And so in this way we can estimate the amount of inconsistency and we can test uh whether there is inconsistency.

It's also possible even to include characteristics to try to explain this variance in uh this variance component.

So to explain this inconsistency.

So in practice suppose that you have five different treatments.

Well, you could uh make use of four dummy variables.

A dummy variable for treatment two for one for treatment three, one for treatment four, one for treatment five.

And suppose that one treatment two is compared to treatment three.

Then you have a one for the dummy variable x2 and you have a minus one for the dummy variable x3. you have an additional column with the mean differences and so on.

And so based on the use of this model that is shown uh on the slide with these dummy variables included, you can estimate um yeah the means or the expected values for each of the treatments.

Note that for one treatment you do not estimate the mean because uh the dependent variable are mean differences.

So the model would not be defined if you would try to estimate the mean for each of the treatments.

There is one of the treatments that should be used as a reference category otherwise the model is not identified. a remark.

So you can test inconsistency by testing the variance component but this test can be underpowered for instance when you have a small number of studies that give direct evidence or when you have a large heterogeneity a lot of heterogeneity.

So in these situations it is possible that in fact there is inconsistency but that based on your analysis you are not able to confirm the existence of inconsistency.

So you cannot consider a non-significant test of inconsistency as a proof that there is no inconsistency as a proof of the transitivity assumption.

Now suppose that you found that there is inconsistency.

How can can you continue?

Well, if you found inconsistency, so you know that the transitivity assumption may not work.

So maybe in that situation, it is safer to use the direct effect estimates only rather than uh also including indirect estimates.

An alternative approach is to try to explain inconsistency.

So you can look at effect modifiers uh or you can include effect modifiers in your model to try to correct for these effect modifiers and to reduce the variance um component referring to the inconsistency. or you can continue with um your effect estimates.

But then it is important to take into account the variance referring to that inconsistency when um yeah when constructing confidence intervals uh around the um the treatment effects or for testing the treatment effects because this amount of inconsistency adds to the uncertainty about the treatment effects.

Then a final a few final remarks.

So how many treatments can you include in your network?

So the broader you you make your network.

So the more treatments you include in your network, the more interesting your meta analysis can become because then you compare more treatments with each other and um yeah it can be yeah you get more results, you see better what treatments are more effective than what other treatments but at the same time your analysis is becoming much more complex and especially you are making much more comparisons.

So the number of comparisons, the numbers, the number of pairs of treatments that are compared is increasing to to a very large degree by including additional treatments.

So this makes that you are estimating much more parameters and it is possible that at the end um yeah you do not get stable estimates anymore of the different treatment effects.

The suggestion I also want to give is well if you doubt whether to include an additional uh treatment you can also do a sensitivity analysis.

We can look at does the um effect that we estimate um for comparing A with C does it change when we do not include only A, B and C as treatments in our network but also a treatment D.

So in that way you can see how stable your network uh analysis uh results are.

And if you can see that results are not very stable, then it is important to be transparent about it and also warn uh the the reader of your paper that results are not very stable or you can simplify your model and exclude some of the treatments to make the results more stable.

A second remark is that well up to now I assumed that all studies include only one effect.

So that um for instance uh each study is comparing one treatment with a control condition or one treatment with another treatment.

But sometimes um in one and the same study multiple treatments are uh compared directly.

So in that u sense or in that in that situation we talk about a multi-arm study.

So such studies will give multiple effect sizes will give multiple standardized mean differences and so we should take into account that these multiple effect sizes are coming from the same study and so in that sense that there they are not independent of each other or there is some overlap in information.

So we should take into account that correlation between effect sizes coming from the same study.

But I'm not going to give more details about uh the techniques for network meta analysis.

======================================================================
Meta Analysis 14 Applications and extensions Meta analysis of diagnostic studies
======================================================================

In this session, I will talk about the meta analysis of diagnostic studies.

What is a diagnostic study?

The purpose of a diagnostic study is to evaluate the quality of diagnostic test.

So think for instance of a self test for corona.

You hope that your tests can make a distinction between people who are positive and people who are not ne uh positive.

In diagnostic studies, often multiple tests are compared to each other, but it's also possible that only one specific test is studied.

What kind of data reported in a diagnostic test study?

Well, if you want to say something about the quality of a diagnostic test, we need to have uh yeah a standard or we we need to have a criterion to decide on whether a person is positive or not. and we use that criterion to see whether our test that we want to evaluate works well.

So let's look at the cases that are positive.

We hope that with our tests, most of these cases that are positive are also positively tested.

So we hope that the cases that are truly positive is as high as possible compared to cases that are positive but that are not positively tested.

So these cases are called false negatives.

So we hope that the true positives is larger than the false negative number.

Similarly, for the cases that are in reality negative, we hope that most of them are tested negatively.

So, these cases are called true negatives and that there are only a few or non uh cases that are positively tested.

So, these cases are called false positives.

So in general, we hope that the dark blue and the dark red cell uh include as many cases as possible and that the other two cells include as few cases as possible.

So think for instance of an instrument uh a screening instrument for the down syndrome.

So suppose that in a study we have data from about 5,000 uh persons 5,000 uh babies.

Some of them are positive.

So some of them shown down syndrome more specifically about 10 persons and the other persons are not positive.

So suppose that these 5,000 babies were also screened previously so during the pregnancy and that from the 10 positive cases nine cases were positively tested in using the screening instrument and one of them was not detected using the screening instrument from all the negative cases.

So there are um 4,800 negative cases.

From all these negative cases, most of them were tested negatively based on the screening instrument, which is good.

But 351 cases were tested positively.

So of course um both errors are not desirable.

So if a specific baby has the down syndrome and this was not detected using the screening instrument, this has negative consequences.

For instance, maybe uh the parents um would have um decided to abort the baby or maybe um it has negative consequences in the sense that that the parents are not prepared at all for having a baby with Down syndrome. the other type of error.

So the negative and the cases that were tested positive whereas in fact these babies did not have the down syndrome also is not desirable.

This induces unnecessary stress for the parents.

So if parents are told that maybe uh the baby that they will get um will have the down syndrome whereas in fact this is not true.

This induces ne unnecessary stress.

The measure that we can use to express the quality of the screening instrument is the odds ratio.

Here we can talk about the diagnostic odds ratio.

We have already seen the odds ratio as a measure of association between two dichoamous variables.

So we can use this uh measure here as well.

Odds ratio can be calculated by multiplying the true positives and the true negatives.

So that are the dark red and the dark blue cells.

And we divide this multiplication by the false positives multiplied by the false negatives.

So these are the two kinds of cases for which we made a wrong decision.

The diagnostic odds ratio in the example is 114.08.

Note that there will be no association between the two uh uh variables if the odds ratio is equal to one.

So here the ratio is clearly much higher than one.

An alter of one would mean that the screening instrument does not say anything about um whether or not um a case is positive.

We've also seen that an drawback of the ozio is that it has a skewed distribution.

It's also not very um very handy that the um the absence of an effect the absence of an association means that the odds ratio would be equal to one. it's easier um if if the value if the um measure of association would be equal to zero if there is no association at all.

Another drawback of the odds ratio is that the sampling variance is not easily uh calculated.

So therefore very often the natural logarithm of the odds ratio is taken.

So we use the LO odds ratio.

In this example, the LO odds ratio is 4.74.

A loss ratio equal to zero means that there is no association at all.

So again here we see that there is evidence that the screening instrument seems to work.

The sampling variance of the lostu can be calculated by taking one over the the sample size in the first cell plus one over the sample size in the second cell and so on.

And so in our example this gives a sampling variance of 1.11.

We can use that uh sampling variance to calculate a confidence interval around the loz ratio. the sampling distribution of the loit loss ratio is more or less a normal distribution.

So we can calculate the confidence interval or 95% confidence interval by taking the mean or the uh the estimate of the local ops ratio and subtracting or adding 1.96 times the square root of the sampling variance.

This gives us confidence interval starting from 2.67 going to 6.81.

A zero is not included in the confidence interval.

So again here it's clear that there is an association between the two variables or in other words that the screening instrument says something about um uh being positive or not.

Remark uh suppose that uh one of the cells does not include uh cases or that in one of the cells the number is equal to zero.

In that case you cannot calculate um the odds ratio and or the sampling variance of the odds ratio.

So a solution um that is often used is that you can add 0.5 to all of the four cells to avoid that in one of the cells you have zero.

Now suppose that you have a sample of studies of diagnostic studies and in each of these studies you have an ulcer rates or you can calculate an ulcer rates.

How can you combine the data from these um studies?

Well, we can combine these diagnostic odds ratios or more specifically we can combine the loss ratios using ordinary precision weighted metalic techniques that we have seen before.

You can also if in some of the studies uh odds ratios are calculated but in other studies you have standardized mean differences.

We have seen that you can convert loss ratios to standardized mean differences using this formula.

So the standardized mean difference is equal to the loss ratio multiplied by the square root of 3 / pi.

And so this means that you have to to multiply the sampling variance of the lock ratio by three divided by pi squared to obtain um the sampling variance of the standardized mean difference.

Of course you can also calculate um lo ratios based on standardized mean differences.

So convert um measures in the other direction.

Um when are you going to use loss ratios in your meta analysis?

When are you going to use standardized main differences?

So you can choose between these two options.

But a good idea is to use um yeah the effect size that is uh more commonly used in our set of studies.

So if you have 10 studies in which a loss ratio can immediately be calculated and one study in which a standardized mean difference is uh reported then it makes sense to convert that one standardized mean difference to the loss ratio.

Note that by calculating an odds ratio or loss ratio, you lose some information in the sense that it's possible that different kind of tables will give exactly the same uh os ratio and therefore also the same loss ratio.

So you lose information that is uh included in your table by uh calculating the odds ratio.

Can we avoid losing information?

Yes, we can.

It is possible to calculate two measures of quality instead of that one measure uh the odds ratio.

More specifically, we can calculate the sensitivity and the specificity.

What is the sensitivity?

The sensitivity is the number of true positives divided by the total number of positives.

So here in the example we have 10 positive cases and nine of them of them were uh were detected using the screening instrument.

So that means that the sensitivity is 90%.

So it's the probability that a positive case will be tested positively.

The specificity is the number of true negatives divided by the total number of negative cases.

So in our example, there were 4,800 negative cases and 4,449 of these cases were indeed tested negatively.

So that means that for 93% of the negative cases um these cases were tested negatively.

So we hope that both the sensitivity and the specificity are as high as possible.

Note um 93% of the negative cases were tested negatively.

So this means that 7% of the negative cases were tested positively.

So this is called the false positive rate.

The false positive rate is the probability that a negative case is still tested positively.

What is also sometimes reported in diagnostic studies is the like likely likelihood ratio for cases that were positively tested and the likelihood ratio for cases that were negatively tested.

What is that likelihood ratio for positive positively tested cases?

Well, that's the probability that a positive case is tested positively.

So that's the sensitivity divided by the probability that a negative case is tested positively.

So that's one minus specificity.

And the likelihood ratio for the negative negatively tested cases is the probability of a positive case tested negatively divided by the probability of a negative case tested negatively.

So it's one minus the sensitivity divided by um the specificity and the ratio between that uh likelihood ratio for the positively tested cases divided by uh the likelihood ratio for the cases that are negatively tested. that ratio is another way um of calculating the diagnostic odds ratio.

Now instead of doing a meta analysis of the diagnostic odds ratios, it's also possible to do meta analysis of the sensitivity and specificity values.

One way is to do two separate met analysis.

So again using precision weight uh weighted analysis but separately for the sensitivity values and specificity values.

Another approach which is somewhat more efficient is to use a bariate meta analysis.

So how does it work?

Well, we say that um the number of positive test results for positive cases in study I and the number of positive test results for negative cases in study I.

These two numbers follow binomial distributions.

So the number of positive test results for positive cases in study I follow a binomial distribution with uh yeah the number of positive cases and with a probability.

So the probability that a positive case is tested positively.

So that's the sensitivity for the negative uh cases.

The probability of that binomial distribution is the false positive rate.

So one minus um the specificity.

So that's the probability that a negative case will be tested positively.

And then we say well these two probabilities so the sensitivity and the false positive rate they follow a normal distribution across studies. with means theta 1 and theta 2.

So theta 1 is the overall sensitivity across all studies and the U1 I is the random effect of study I for the sensitivity.

So if that is positive then this means that the true sensitivity for study I is larger than the mean sensitivity across all studies.

The same is true for the false positive rate.

So theta 2 is the overall false positive rate across all studies and the U2I is the random deviation for study I.

Um so if that is positive then the false positive rate for that study or the true false positive rate for that study is larger than the overall false positive rate.

And we assume that both random effects follow a normal distribution a multivariate normal distribution with means zero and with variances and a covariance that should be estimated.

So now yeah we use a multivariate or a bariate meta analysis.

So now we have two between study variances.

So the between study variance in the sensitivity rate and the between study variance in the false positive rate and there is a co or there's possibly co-variance um between the two um parameters across studies.

Note the sensitivity and the specificity that is found in a specific study depends on the cut off or the threshold that is used in that study.

So suppose that you have that you have a test value and that um when the value exceeds a specific value the threshold you conclude okay that case is positive when that person or the test value does not um exceed the threshold then that person is called a negative case.

Well, and suppose that you have um in reality so two distributions two normal distributions of these test values.

Uh the uh the blue distribution is a distribution of the negative cases.

So the really negative cases, the red distribution is the distribution of the cases that are in reality positive.

And you can see that um part of the negative cases have a value um that is larger than the threshold.

So that's the light blue um surface.

So these are the false positives.

You can also see that from all positive cases.

So that's the right normal distribution.

Part of them have has a value lower than the threshold.

So these cases are not tested positively whereas they are positive.

So these are the false negatives.

So that part is given in light red.

Note that by increasing the thresholds, so by moving the green line line to the right, the number of false positives will become smaller.

So this means that the specificity that is found in that study will become higher.

At the same time, there will be more false negatives.

So the light red surface will become larger.

So this means that the sensitivity will become lower.

So by incre increasing the green line you increase the specificity which is good but at the same time you decrease the sensitivity which is not good.

So therefore you can expect that there is an association between specificity and sensitivity.

So that there is a a co-variance.

So in the previous slide I explained that we can estimate the coariance between specificity and sensitivity.

Well in fact we can expect that there is a negative association between the two measures because different studies can use different thresholds.

And so studies using a very large threshold will probably have a higher specificity rate but a lower sensitivity rate.

So the sensitivity and the specificity depend on the cutoff used.

So this means that the results of the math analysis are not very not that interesting in the sense that uh variances in specificity and sensitivity may not reflect true differences um between the study findings but may rather reflect difference between studies in the threshold that is used as an alternative approach which is however um statistically equivalent.

You can also use the receiving operating characteristic curves.

So the rock curves.

So a rock curve summarizes the data per study or possibly over studies.

So a rock curves looks like this.

So on the yaxis you have the sensitivity.

On the x axis you have um the one minus the specificity.

So on the y-axis you have the probability that positive cases are tested positively.

On the x-axis you have the probability that negative cases are tested positively.

So you hope that um a study will find Yeah.

Well, and and for each study you will have you can calculate these two measures and you hope that the sensitivity will be as high as possible and the one minus the specificity will be as small as possible but you can expect that there is a relationship between the two.

So the higher the sensitivity, the lower the specificity and therefore also the higher one minus the specificity.

Now suppose that yeah so here you can see the results of multiple studies.

Each dot stands for one specific study.

Um all these studies uh studied one specific instrument.

So all these data together give some evidence that that instrument seems to work.

If the instrument does not work at all, then the dots would um would be scattered around that diagonal um line.

More specifically, then you would expect that the probability that positive cases are tested positively is exactly the same as a probability that negative cases are positively tested.

So in that case um the dots would be distributed around that diagonal uh line.

But here you can see that the majority of the dots are higher than that uh diagonal line.

So which means that even if the yeah the spec yeah for given a specific specificity um sensitivity one minus the specificity is smaller.

So this is what we hope to find.

You can go to that site uh uh from which I I have put the link on the slide to play around with a threshold.

And you can see indeed that if you change a threshold then you would uh expect to find another sensitivity and another one minus specificity.

And so that curve um that is uh given in that uh in that plot um yeah describes how um the sensitivity and u the specificity are related to each other and um the values depend on the threshold that is used.

So based on that curve you can find the best solution.

You can um you can think about what is the cost of making one specific error and the cost of making another type of error.

For instance, what is the cost of not finding a positive case versus what is the cost of um saying that the case is positive whereas that case is not positive.

And by balancing these two costs, you can decide on what threshold you could use.

Note that uh the second plot here looks better than the first plot.

In the second plot, the instrument seems to to be able uh better to make a distinction between these two distributions.

So whereas in the first plot in the upper plot there is a large part or large surface of false positives and false negatives in the um the plot at the bottom it's clear that these two surfaces are much smaller.

This is also reflected in the um rock curve.

You can see that here the rock curve is much higher is much farther away from the diagonal line.

A measure that can be used to express express how good the instrument is is the area under the curve.

So the area under the diagonal line would be 0 50.

So the area under the curve for the instrument at the uh upper plot is 73.

For the under plot it is almost one.

So you can see that uh there's only a small part of the total surface that is on the left side of the curve.

So you hope that that curve that that area is as large as possibly possible.

Ideally this equal to one.

So the higher the area under the curve the better.

Now how you how can you met analyze rock curves?

Well you can use this model.

So at the lowest level so within studies we have the same equations as before.

So we say that the number of positively tested cases um given that cases are positive follow a binomial distribution with number of positive cases and with a specific sensitivity rate. the number of positively tested negative cases.

Uh it follows a binomial distribution with the number of negative cases in that study and with a probability that is equal to one minus specificity.

And then we say well these two um probabilities so these two pies can be described as a nonlinear function of theta i plus alpha i * x i j * x - beta xig J.

So there are two uh probabilities.

So pi 1 i and pi 2 i.

So the j in the equation uh of level two refers to positive subjects or negative subjects. and the Xig J is equal to one for positive subjects and zero for negative subjects.

And then the parameters that are estimated in our meta analysis are the means of theta eyes and the alpha eyes as well as the variances and the covariances across studies of these two parameters.

But what are the uh the meanings of these parameters?

Well, so suppose that you have um so so so xig reverse is equal to one for positive cases and zero for negative cases.

So for negative cases the equation uh simplifies a lot.

So for negative cases the logit of pi is equal to theta i.

So theta i determines the probability for a negative person of being tested positively.

So that refers to the threshold used in the study.

And so the variance in the ice refers to uh the differences between studies in the threshold that is used.

Alpha I.

So which is a parameter for study I indicates to what extent the probability for testing positively changes when um a person in reality is positive and not negative.

So it refers to the discrimination of the test.

So we hope that alpha i is as high as possible.

So alpha i refers to the quality of the test.

And what is the meaning of beta?

So you can see that in the graph.

So in the graph you can see uh look first at the red and the blue curve.

So the blue curve is for a test that discriminates not at all.

So for a test with a quality of zero.

So alpha is equal to zero.

Whereas for the red curve alpha is equal to two.

You can see that um it's better the the higher alpha the better the test discriminates between the two uh groups between true positives and true negatives.

What's the meaning of beta?

Well, compare the red and the gray curve.

Well, the red curve is a symmetric curve whereas the gray curve is an asymmetric curve.

So the beta um yeah describes or expresses the asymmetry of the rock curve.

======================================================================
Meta Analysis 15 Applications and extensions Meta analytic SEM
======================================================================

In this screencast we will look at metaanalytic structural equation modeling MAM.

First I will give more details about structural equation modeling SAM and illustrate SAM with an example.

Next I will tell you more about its extension to the modeling of data from multiple studies and again we use an example to illustrate such a mimm analysis.

First, structural equation modeling.

A SM model combines two kinds of models.

A structural model and a measurement model.

The structural model describes the relationship between multiple variables.

These variables can be observed variables like for instance the length of a person.

But it's also possible to work with latent variables.

These are theoretical variables that cannot be observed directly.

Examples of latent variables are motivation or emotional intelligence.

Whereas motivation cannot be observed directly, it can be derived from observed behaviors.

For instance, indicators of the motivation of a student are the number of questions the student asks during a lecture or the number of exercises the student makes at home.

A measurement model is used to link latent variables to observed variables.

In other words, to clarify based on which manifest variables one gets information on latent variables.

Let's look first at structural models or the structural component of structural equation models.

Various traditional models like multiple regression models can be considered as special cases of structural equation models.

Suppose two predictors X1 and X2 are used to predict the criterion variable Y and that all three variables are observed variables.

In structural equation modeling, it's common to present a model in a graphical way using a so-called path diagram.

Observed variables are presented with rectangular boxes.

Here in regression model, the two predictor variables can have an effect on the criterion variable.

Single-headed arrows between boxes refer to causal relationships or in the SAM model to regression weights.

Note that by default, an intercept is estimated but not shown in the output of a SAM analysis.

A circular arrow refers to the variance of a variable.

Double-headed arrows between boxes refer to covariances.

For the criterion variable Y, part of the variance is explained by the predictors.

Part of the variance is not explained.

Also, the unexplained variance therefore is a parameter that should be estimated.

Structural equation modeling has two purposes.

Estimating the parameters. here the betas the covariance between predictors and the residual variance.

The second purpose is to test the fit of the model.

One can fit various models for instance a multiple regression model with two predictors and a model with only one predictor and then compare the model fit to evaluate whether the inclusion of the second predictor is significantly improving the predictions.

If you would standard, if you would use standardized data, the variances of the predictors become one.

The co-variance between the predictors then is the correlation between them.

The residual variance is the proportion of the variance that is not explained and the regression weights are standardized weights.

Another example of a structural model is an ANOVA model.

The triangle stands for a constant.

Here a constant one.

In this plot, we have two groups with different regression weights for the constant referring to the expected values in the two groups.

The variance of the outcome variable can be group specific.

Although it's also possible to assume homogeneity which means that only one variance is to be estimated.

An advantage of using structural models is that we can fit more complex models.

For instance, models with intervening or mediating variables that at the same time play the role of a predictor and criterion variable.

In this way, you can fit for instance models to investigate to what extent the effect on of X on Y is a direct effect or an indirect effect via the mediator variable M.

Now let's look at the second component of structural equation models, the measurement model.

As an example of a measurement model, look at the confirmatory factor analysis model.

Observed variables indicated with rectangles are supposed to measure latent factors indicated using ellipses.

The double-headed arrow between the two factors indicates that the factors can be correlated.

The single-headed arrows uh from the latent factors to the observed variables represent regression weights or factor loadings to make the model identified.

Typically for each factor, one loading is constrained to one.

In addition, there are the variance parameters for the latent and observed variables.

For observed variables, the variance refers to the variance that is not explained by the latent factors.

Again, we could fit multiple models.

For instance, this model with two factors and a model with only one general factor on which all observed variables load and compare the model fit in order to choose the best fitting model.

Some models can combine both structural and measurement models.

For example, a latent variable L3 can be requested on two other latent variables L1 and L2.

This is a structural part of the model.

All three latent variables may be measured using a set of observed variables which is modeled in the measurement part of this SAM model.

An example as input for a sum analysis you have to specify a model.

This implies that you specify the measurement part.

So you specify what observed variables load on what latent variables and you further have to specify the structural relations between the variables.

Further indicate what variables can be correlated and clarify possible constraints.

For instance, assume you want to do a multiple regression analysis with two observed predictor variables X1 and X2 that can be correlated and that are assumed to have an impact on the criterion variable Y.

An important remark is that in a SEM analysis on data from a cross-sectional observational study, this is a study in which several variables are measured at the same time and no variables are experimentally manipulated.

We can estimate parameters of the model and compare the model fit of various models but we do not prove that the assumed direction of the effects is correct.

The same analysis can be done on raw data but it's also possible to use a coariance or a correlation matrix.

Suppose this is the correlation matrix you obtained based on 120 observations.

Both predictors X1 and X2 correlate positively with a criterion variable Y and there is also a positive correlation between the two predictors.

This will give the following output.

Note that you can replicate the results using the R syntax prepared for this screencast.

Here the output is given in a visual way with estimates of the variances, co-variances and regression weights.

Because here correlation matrix is used as input, the variances of the predictors are equal to one and the residual variance refers to the proportion of variance that is not explained by the model.

You see that the two predictors explain 19% of the variance.

Whereas the observed variance of Y is equal to one.

The residual variance of Y appears to be 81.

Further you see that the correlation between the predictors is equal to 50.

A correlation that was already given as input and the regression weights are equal to 030 and 0.20.

You can also look at the output in a table format.

If you look at the standard errors and ZV values, you see that both coefficients are statistically significant at the 0.05 significance level, which means that each predictor improves the model even if the other predictor was already included in the model.

Note that in principle, you can also test the model fit, but here you use six values as input to estimate six parameters.

So there are no degrees of freedom left for testing the model.

The six input var val values are the three variances of one and the three correlations.

The six parameters that are estimated are the two regression weights, the correlation between the predictors, the two variances equal to one for the predictors and the residual variance of y.

After this short introduction in SAM, let us now look at a metanalytic sum analysis and at metanalytic sum analysis or mayam analysis.

In a metalytic sum, we estimate the sum model parameters using combined information from multiple studies.

This can be done in two steps.

In the first step, we combine the data from multiple studies to estimate an overall correlation matrix.

And in the second step, we do the sum analysis based on this combined correlation matrix.

Alternatively, a MSM analysis can be done in one step.

Am analysis combines advantages from met analysis and from structural equation modeling.

By combining data from multiple studies like in other meta analysis, you can increase the statistical power when testing hypothesis and the precision when estimating the parameters of interest.

It also allows estimating and testing moderating effects of study characteristics.

MSM also has a flexibility of SAM in general.

You can estimate various kinds of models with latent and observed variables.

Here we will look only at two-stage mason analysis.

In the first stage, we combine the correlations from multiple studies to obtain an overall correlation matrix.

Note that studies can differ in the size of the sample used and hence in the precision of their estimates and therefore observed correlations should be weighted in the meta analysis.

Note that it is not required that all studies report on all correlations.

If you want to fit a multiple regression model with two predictors, you need estimates of three correlations, but also studies that report on only one or two of these correlations can contribute information to the meta analysis.

As a result, not all pulled correlations will have the same precision, which should be accounted for in the second stage.

It's also important to note that we will not do separate univariat math analysis for the different correlations because in that way we would not account for the dependence of correlations from the same study.

For instance, if in a study the sample has some atypical values for the variable X, this will affect both the correlation between X and Y and the correlation between X and Z.

Therefore, we do a multivariate meta analysis and we can use robust variance estimation or RVE to fully account for the dependence.

The first stage will result in a correlation matrix across studies together with a sampling variance or the squared standard error of each bullet correlation.

The sampling variance gives us an idea of the precision of the estimates but also the sampling coariances are estimated which gives us an idea of the association between correlations within studies.

In the second stage, the matrix with a pulled correlations is then used to estimate the SM model.

But in contrast to an ordinary SE analysis, we are now also accounting for the matrix with the corresponding variances and co-variances of the pulled correlations.

There is discussion in the literature on whether dehumanizing a group, for instance, calling a group cockroaches or rats, can contribute to violence against that group.

Some people suggest that dehumanization is strongly related to disliking the other group and that it is the dislike that contributes to violence rather than the dehumanization.

In a recent study, we did a meta analysis on studies that studied violence, deumanization, and dislike to investigate whether there is still an association between deumanization and violence after correcting for dislike.

The model we fitted was a multiple regression model.

Violence is regressed on dislike and dehumanization.

Two predictors that can be correlated.

The regression weights of the two predictors represent the effect of the predictor on violence after correcting for the other predictor.

In the first stage, we did a multivaried meta analysis applying RVE.

Again the data and R syntax are made available so that you can replicate this analysis.

This first stage resulted in a first matrix with a pulled correlations across studies.

We found that overall violence is more strongly correlated with deumanization than with dislike.

We also found as expected that dislike and deumanization are positively correlated.

A second matrix is a coariance matrix because there are three correlations.

We have in the coariance matrix 3 * 3 cells.

On the diagonal we have the sampling variances.

You see that the correlation between dislike and violence is estimated with less precision than the two other correlations.

Off the diagonal you have the sampling covariances.

For instance, the positive uh sampling coariance between the deumanization violence correlation and the dislike violence correlation means that in studies in which a relatively large deumanization violence correlation is observed in general also a large a relatively large dislike violence correlation is found.

In the second stage, the correlations are used to fit the same model parameters.

We found that after correcting for the effect of dislike, the effect of dehumanization is still statistically significant.

To test this coefficient, we calculated the 95% confidence interval and we compared the model fit of this model with a model that constrained the coefficient of dehumanization to zero.

The opposite is not true.

If we account for the effect of dehumanization, there is no statistically significant additional effect of dislike anymore.

Together, the two predictors explain about 19% of of the variance in the amount of violence.

We also did a series of sensitivity analysis in which we corrected for a few additional predictors.

But we found that results are robust for all these additional models.

We found that dehumanization is statistically significantly related to violence even after accounting for the effect of dislike.

To conclude, an important strength of MSAM is its flexibility.

Messa models can include observed but also latent variables.

They can include multiple levels, multiple predictors, multiple outcome variables, mediators, moderators and so on.

In fact, all met analytic models that we have seen so far can be considered as special cases of a Mason model.

Yet, Mason is a recently developed approach that is not fully developed yet.

More research is needed on the possibilities and the performance of the approach.

Finally, here's some references to the work of March Chung and Susanna Yak on Mason.

======================================================================
Meta Analysis 16 Reporting and discussing the results
======================================================================

In this video, we will look at the reporting and discussion of the results.

First, it is important that you describe the process of your review or meta analysis because this will make your study replicable and helps the reader understand and contextualize your findings.

For instance, a good practice is to describe this process of searching and selecting studies.

To that end, a flowchart can be helpful to describe how many studies you initially found and then explain how you ended up with a smaller set of studies. you see a more elaborated flowchart based on the Prisma format that you can download via the link given in red.

Note that in this meta analysis, more than 18,000 sources were initially identified.

But after screening the titles and abstracts, the large majority of sources was excluded.

After reading the full text of the remaining sources, only 67 studies were considered eligible.

In the flowchart, the reasons for excluding studies are also listed together with a number of studies excluded for each of these reasons.

Also, other aspects of the metal analytic process should be described such as how effect sizes were calculated.

What software was used to do the analysis, what decisions were made and why, what problems were encountered and so on.

Also explore and describe the data by means of tables and graphs before doing the actual statistical analysis.

It's a good idea to make a table with the most important features of the studies that were found.

In this way, the reader gets a good idea of what kind of research was done and also what kind of research has not yet been done.

It's also an efficient way to give a lot of information on each of the individual studies.

Such a table can be quite long.

So sometimes it's not included in the paper itself but added in an appendix or in online supplemental material.

Forest plot gives a nice overview of the effects that were observed.

In this plot for instance, one can immediately see that the majority of studies found a positive effect and about half of them a significant positive effect.

A similar plot is a caterpillar plot.

In contrast to the forest plot, observed effect sizes are now ordered from small to large, resulting in the shape of a caterpill.

Based on the plot in this example, you can immediately see that a large majority of studies found a positive effect size, but that only a minority of studies found a significant effect.

It's also good to describe the proportion of positive and negative effects as well as a proportion of positive and negative significant effects.

After describing the data clearly report on the results of the meta analysis again a forest plot can be helpful.

A forest plot does not only give the individual observed effect sizes but also gives the mean effect size with a corresponding confidence interval which you can see here at the bottom of the plot.

Here are an example of how you can report results of a moderator analysis for categorical uh moderators.

For the moderator level of processing, for example, there are two categories of effect sizes, local and global.

For each category, the number of observed effect sizes is reported as well as the mean effect size and the results of the t testing that this mean effect size is zero.

In addition, the results of an F test is reported.

Testing the moderating effect.

This is this is whether the expected effect size is different for the different categories to communicate on the findings of categorical moderator analysis.

You can also use sorted caterpillar plot with it with for the different categories the observed effect sizes as well as the estimated mean effect which is given in the shaded areas.

In this example, it shows that the majority of effect sizes fall in the first category and that for this category the mean effect is largest. or numerical or continuous moderator variables, regression plot can be helpful.

Here the size of the dots refers to the weight that is given to the observed effect sizes.

In other words, refers to the precision of the effect sizes. course, you should also help the reader in interpreting the results.

In this regard, I want to make an important remark regarding the external validity.

The golden standard in empirical research is to draw a random sample of participants from a population of participants so that we can more easily generalize the findings to that population.

In a meta analysis, we also typically consider the observed studies as a random sample or population of studies that are done or could have been done.

But in fact, we did not draw a random sample.

We collected the results from studies that we found.

We have seen that publication bias can be an issue.

The studies that you find may be a systematic selection of the studies that were done.

But even if you could find all the studies that were done, the studies that are done are probably also a systematic selection of studies that could have been done.

For instance, if you search for studies, it's not unlikely that onethird or even half of the studies are from the United States and another large part from Europe.

Often there is a smaller part of studies coming from Asia and very little very few studies from South America and especially Africa.

Therefore, it's hard to generalize the findings to the whole world.

In addition, it's possible that interventions were studied not only in contexts in which it is expected that these interventions may work which also can give a biased idea of the overall effect of the interventions.

In some take care with interpretation of your results.

Always wonder to what extent your results can be generalized and how the population of studies to which you would generalize your findings looks like.

Another golden rule is that in order to draw causal conclusions, it's best to assign participants randomly to different conditions while keeping all other variables under control.

If you then find the difference between conditions in the outcome variable, it's likely that this difference is caused by the condition.

But in a meta analysis, you cannot randomly assign studies to conditions and keep other characteristics under control.

You simply can observe the characteristics of studies and the effects that these studies found.

Therefore, if you observe, for instance that studies with female researchers found higher effects than studies with male researchers, you cannot say that the intervention effect is affected by the gender of the researcher.

Other study characteristics may be related to the gender of the researcher and these other characteristics could be the real reason why the effect is different.

For instance, female researchers may be more common in some countries or they may be more common for some participant age groups or for some kinds of interventions.

It is of course also important to check the assumptions that that you made in the analysis and to report on these checks.

Like we discussed earlier, it's a good idea to check for evidence for publication bias and possibly correct for publication bias.

Also look for possible outlying effect sizes and their impact on the results and check other assumption as well like for instance the assumption that effect sizes or at least residuals are normally distributed.

Finally I highly recommend doing several sensitivity analysis.

In a math analysis, we indeed have to make a lot of decisions and often it's not clear what decision is the best decision.

Therefore, it's a good idea to assess what the effect is of your decisions by looking at whether and how your conclusions would change if you had taken another decision.

If the conclusion remains unaltered, then this confirms that your conclusion can be trusted.

Yet if the conclusion changes when another decision is taken, this reduces your confidence in your conclusion.

It is important to be transparent about this in your report and so to to share to share your uncertainty about the conclusion.

For instance, you can look at how sensitive the conclusions are for the inclusion or exclusion of outliers.

Also, when calculating effect sizes, we may have to make decisions.

For instance, sometimes no information is given on the correlation between pre-est and post- test scores.

Whereas this is needed to calculate the precision of a standardized mean difference in such a design.

Therefore, you can impute a value, but it is good to assess how sensitive the conclusions of your meta analysis are for the value that was imputed.

Similarly, one could choose to include all studies in the met analysis or only um include studies with a strong design or a high quality.

You can assess the impact of this choice on the conclusions by comparing the results of both choices.

Further, you can assess the robustness of the conclusions for the researcher who did the research uh the effect size calculation, the analysis and so on by letting another researcher redo these steps and then compare the results.

Also redoing the analysis with other model choices can help to assess the confidence one can have in the conclusions.

I want to conclude by saying that good reporting is an essential component of good research.

======================================================================
Meta Analysis 17 Tools for meta analysis
======================================================================

In this final video, let us look at some tools that can help you while doing a meta analysis or systematic review.

Let's first look at some checklists and guidelines.

We have already seen that there are various checklists that can be used to assess the quality of primary studies.

But there are also checklists to evaluate the quality of systematic reviews and meta analysis.

These checklists may also help you to make sure that your review or meta analysis is of good quality.

Here is selection from the CASP tool for assessing the quality of a systematic review of RCTs.

Questions are asked and for each question some hints are given.

Another tool is a robes tool related to the risk of bias tools for primary studies.

This tool is meant to assess the risk of bias in systematic reviews.

Other checklists were developed to make sure that your report is complete and clear.

Probably the best known checklist for reporting is a Prisma checklist.

The checklist includes 27 items regarding the different parts of the systematic review report.

Here you see the first 14 items that can be checked if reported.

Another kind of tools is software for managing references.

Probably the most commonly used tools are endnot.

These tools allow you to import the hits from the database searches.

They can also be used to remove duplicates.

You can also add notes, for instance, on why you did or did not include this study in the review.

You can also attach files, for instance, the PDF of the paper, and you can use the tool for making a reference list for your report.

There's also software that is specifically developed for systematic reviews.

One such tool is a EPI reviewer.

This web based tool can also be used to manage the references, but it's also a very helpful tool for organizing the data extraction with multiple coders.

You can create codes, divide the papers over multiple coders, let each coder code the papers in a web- based form, calculate intracoder agreement, and so on and so forth.

Tools like rind and confidence go a step further by including AI techniques.

For instance, they can be used to highlight words or text that are likely related to the components of the PCO model and hence can make it easier for reviewers to find the information needed to decide on inclusion.

Ryan even can gradually learn the relevance of studies based on previous decisions reviewer made about in or exclusion.

The tool elicit even aims to make the whole screening and data extraction process automatic which can save huge amounts of time for the reviewer.

Also, other generative AI tools that are not specifically developed for systematic reviews may be helpful.

Complexity AI can give answers to questions like CHBT but with clear references to the sources that were used.

Consensus AI does the same but looks only in peerreed scientific literature.

It can also judge how much consensus there is among studies.

Semantic scholar is a tool that can be used to discover and summarize academic papers.

The use of AI in systematic reviews and meta analysis is a very recent field of research.

First results look promising, but we can expect that tools and techniques will evolve quickly in the coming years.

This was the final video.

I hope that what you learned will prove helpful to you.

I wish you good luck and take care.

